---

Divina proportione

A work necessary for all perspicacious and curious minds, where every student of Philosophy, Perspective, Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Music and other Mathematics will contain and delight himself with a most sweet, subtle and admirable doctrine and various questions of most secret science.

Reviewed by the most learned M. Ant. Capella.

Printed at Venice by the honest man

Paganinus de Paganinis of Brescia

1509.

Epigram of Daniel Cajetan of Cremona.

Omnipotent nature produced five bodies
These remain called by a certain simple name
Added to each they concur in number as a composite
And associated among themselves they flourish
Founded in the beginning they were pure and without stain
The names are Air, Heaven, Water, Fire and Earth
With innumerable offspring. The greatest Plato wanted those
To be: where the figure is first taken: to give
But because the law of nature concedes nothing in vain
(Aristotle said in Heaven and Earth)
And that which is placed one by itself. Is lacking a figure
Unless the species is under the eye.
Therefore the genius of Euclid and the sublime Plato
Shook out five other Spheres
Pleasant to the aspect and much stimulating the Sense
They showed the bases as every side teaches.


---

Sonnet of the author.

Five bodies are produced in nature
Called by simple naturals.
Because added to each composite
They all concur among themselves by order.
Unmixed, clean and pure were constructed
Four elements and heaven so named.
Which Plato wants you to figure
That they should correspond to infinite fruits.
But because nature abhors a vacuum
Aristotle in that of heaven and world
Wanted to place them not figured by themselves.
However, the profound geometric genius
Of Plato and Euclid pleased to expound
Five others which turn round in a sphere
Regular of jocund aspect.
As you see of equal sides and bases.
And another sixth can never be formed.

FINIS.

The Bodies to the reader.

The sweet fruit vague and so beloved
Constrained the Philosophers already to seek
The cause of us which feeds the intellect.

Distich to the same.

The sweetest fruit drove the Philosophers to seek concerning us
The cause where the happy mind remains.

The Bodies speak.

You who desire to know the various causes of Things
Learn us: To all this one way lies open.

FINIS.

---

Names and number of bodies.

Tetrahedron.
Hexahedron.
Octahedron.
Icosahedron.
Dodecahedron.
These are the five regular bodies.

Of the dependent and resultants from the said.

[List follows in original...]

[TRANSLATOR NOTE: The original TOC continues with a list of bodies and chapters which are translated in the file names themselves.]
