To the Most Excellent Prince Ludovico Maria Sforza Angla, Duke of the Milanese: ornament of peace and war, from Friar Luca Pacioli of Borgo San Sepolcro of the Order of Minors: Professor of Sacred Theology. Epistle on the Divine Proportion.

Running the years of our salvation, Exalted Duke, 1498, on the 9th day of February. Being in the impregnable citadel of your illustrious city of Milan, most worthy place of your usual residence, constituted in the presence of Your [Highness] in the laudable and scientific duel accompanied by many most famous and most wise men of every degree, both religious and secular: of whom your magnificent court abounds assiduously. Of whose number besides the most reverend lordships of Bishops, Protonotaries and Abbots were of our sacred seraphic order the reverend father and sublime theologian Master Gometio most worthy herald of sacred scripture, Friar Domenico by surname Ponzone: the most reverend Father Master Francesco Busti. At present regent deputy in our worthy convent of Milan. And of seculars first my peculiar patron Illustrious Lord Galeazzo Sforza VI. San Severino most strong and general captain of your Ducal Highness in arms today second to none and diligent imitator of our disciplines. And of most clear powers egregious orators: and supreme in medicine and astronomy the most clear and most acute [man] of Serapione and Avicenna and investigator of superior bodies and interpreter of future things Ambrogio Rosa the most learned curer of all ills Aluisi Marliano and most diligent observer of medicine in every part Gabriel Pirovano. And by the aforesaid much admired and venerated in all premises Nicolo Cusano with the most expert of the same professions Andrea Novarese.

And other expert most consulted doctors of both laws and councilors secretaries and chancellors of your most ornate magistrate in the company of the most perspicacious architects and engineers and assiduous inventors of new things Leonardo da Vinci our Florentine compatriot who in sculpture casting and painting verifies his surname with each. Like the admirable and stupendous equestrian statue. Whose height from the neck (cerulee?) to the flat ground is 12 braccia that is 37 and 4/5 times the line ab present here. and its whole bronze mass ascends to about 200,000 [pounds?] which of each the common ounce will be the twelfth dedicated to your most happy undefeated paternal memory, completely alien from the envy of that of Phidias and Praxiteles on Monte Cavallo. With the graceful image of the ardent desire of our salvation in the worthy and devout place of corporal and spiritual refection of the sacred temple of the Graces painted by his hand. To which today Apelles, Myron, Polyclitus and the others must concede and render it clear. And not satiated with these [he] attends with all study to bring to the due end the inestimable work of local motion of percussions and weights and of all forces that is accidental weights (having already with all diligence put an end to the worthy book of painting and human movements). And his fourth brother Giacomo Andrea of Ferrara most accurate follower of the works of Vitruvius. Not however diminished in anything of singular military industry. That one [Your Highness] with his golden and mellifluous words said to be worthy of very great commendation before God and the world he who endowed with some virtue willingly communicates it to others. From which charity results in the neighbor and praise and honor to him imitating the sacred saying: what I learned without fiction and communicate without envy. Of which most sweet words the sense stopped in my mind so that never was it written more solid in marble. And although before it was almost innate by nature to me to use the like with everyone especially of those faculties of which among others it pleased the Highest by his immense benignity to endow me that is of the necessary sciences and most worthy mathematical disciplines. Nevertheless already tired by the laborious toils both diurnal and nocturnal corporal as also spiritual. Which all will be made open to him who with diligence [reads] our great work compiled of similar disciplines and faculties and dedicated to the magnanimous relative of your Highness Duke of Urbino Guido Ubaldo with the others which in the fifth distinction of that are induced [I] was already putting with the others to harvest the years in a sunny place. But greatly excited by those [words] I took back breath at the deserted shore and for condiment of every other work of ours composed of similar faculties and [for] the highest and delightful taste of all the aforesaid sciences and mathematical disciplines to Your Ducal Highness and to the utility of the reverend subjects of that [Highness]. And also to dispose to the decorum and perfect ornament of his most worthy library adorned with an innumerable multitude of volumes in every faculty and doctrine this brief compendium and most useful treatise called on the divine proportion. Which with all its material forms of the bodies which are contained in said [treatise] will give no less admiration to him who will visit that [library] than all the other volumes with their other most worthy things reposted in that. Because said forms have been hidden to the living until now. In which we will speak of high and sublime things which truly are the cement and cupel of all the tasted sciences and disciplines and from that every other speculative scientific practical and mechanical operation derives. Without whose knowledge and presupposition it is not possible to understand well or operate anything among human things as is demonstrated. And therefore Your Ducal Highness with astute intelligence will exhort his familiars and other reverend subjects to discourse that with delight and highest pleasure with most useful fruit. Since they are not old wives' tales or other ridiculous and false facetiousness: nor also lying and incredible poetic inventions. Which only by a smoke feed the ears. Although false things according to the philosopher are useful to us by the cognition of the true ones which follow from them just as the reverse of the right and one opposite of the other. and therefore mostly true things will be useful and profitable to us because from these nothing but true proceeds. But of the true as Aristotle and Averroes affirm our mathematics are most true and in the first degree of certainty and those follow every other natural ones. Wherefore for introduction and argument to the following [matters] let this be sufficient. and therefore it appears clear all other sciences Exalted Duke are opinions and only these are to be called certainties. As among the doctors Avicenna Galen Hippocrates and the others it happens that one says the life of man is in the heart and others in the brain others in the blood adducing reasons and arguments enough to their corroboration. So that it is never good to leave certain things for doubtful ones since these by the wise are called vain whence the verse: Certain things ought not be relinquished for proofs (vanities?) etc. With humility always and due reverence of Your Ducal Highness and to whom supremely continuously I recommend myself. May he fare most happily according to his wishes.


