Cap. IV.

(Of those things which the reader ought to observe for the intelligence of this.)

Next for less trouble in the following [it] is to be noted when sometimes the first of the first, the fourth of the second, the tenth of the fifth, the 20th of the 6th is alleged and so running up to the fifteenth always one ought to understand by the first citation the number of the conclusions. And by the second citation the number of the books of our philosopher Euclid whom in everything we imitate as leader of these faculties. That is saying by the fifth of the first you mean by the fifth conclusion of his first book: and so of the other partial books of his total book of the elements and first principles of Arithmetic and Geometry. But when the authority adduced by us were from another work of his or of another author we will name that such [work] and that such author. Also tor many various characters and abbreviations which are accustomed to be used in such faculties. Especially by us as is required also for every other. Wherefore medicine uses hers for scrupules: ounces: drams: and handfuls. The silversmiths and jewelers for grains pennys and carats. Theirs the astrologers for Jove Mercury Saturn Sun Moon and the others similarly theirs. And the merchants for lire soldi grossi and denari likewise diverse with brevity. And this only to avoid the prolixity of writing and also of reading which doing otherwise would fill much paper with ink. Similarly also we in mathematics for algebra that is speculative practice others which denote thing census and cube and the other terms as is contained in our predicted work. Of the number of which also in this we will use some. And they are those which we placed before in the table. Similarly these names, that is multiplication product rectangle import a same thing. And also these, that is square of a quantity and power of a quantity are a same thing: because the power of the line will be with respect to its square by the last of the first. And more than the line can [do] will be its square. And these things is convenient be observed sometimes in our process: so that one does not equivocate in the sense of the words.
