Cap. V.

(Of the fitting title of the present treatise.)

It seems to me, Exalted Duke, the fitting title of our treatise ought to be of the divine proportion. And this for many similar conveniences which I find in our proportion of which in this our most useful discourse we intend pertaining to God himself. Of which among others we will take four for the sufficiency of our purpose. The first is that it is one only and not more. And it is not possible to assign to it other species nor differences. Which unity is the supreme epithet of God himself according to all the theological and also philosophical school. The second convenience is of the holy trinity. That is just as in divine things one same substance is among three persons father son and holy spirit. So one same proportion of this sort is always convenient to be found among three terms, and never either in more or in less can it be found. As will be said. The third convenience is that just as god properly cannot be defined nor by words understood by us, so this our proportion can never be assigned by understandable number nor expressed by any rational quantity: but is always occult and secret and called irrational by the Mathematicians. The fourth convenience is that just as god can never change and is all in all and all in every part so the present our proportion always in every continuous and discrete quantity: whether they be great: or be they small is one same and always invariable and in no way can change nor also be apprehended otherwise by intellect, as our process will demonstrate. The fifth convenience can not unmeritedly be added to the predicted, that is. Just as God confers being to the celestial virtue called by another name fifth essence and by means of that to the other four simple bodies, that is to the four elements. Earth. Water. Air. And Fire. And through these being to every other thing in nature. So this our holy proportion gives formal being (according to the ancient Plato in his Timaeus) to heaven itself attributing to it the figure of the body called Dodecahedron, otherwise body of 12 pentagons. Which as will be shown below is not possible to be able to form without our proportion. And similarly to each of the other elements it assigns its own form among them in no way coinciding, that is to fire the pyramidal figure called Tetrahedron. To earth the cubic figure called hexahedron. To air the figure called octahedron. And to water that called icosahedron. And these such forms and figures are named by the wise all regular bodies. As separately below of each will be said. And then mediating these infinite other bodies called dependent. Which 5 regulars it is not possible to be able to proportion among themselves nor to be understood circumscriptible by the sphere without our said proportion. Which all will appear below. Which conveniences, although enough others could be adduced, let these be assigned for sufficiency to the fitting denomination of the present compendium.
