Cap. VII.

(Of the first effect of a line divided according to our proportion.)

When a straight line is divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes (for so by another name by the wise is nuncupated [called] our tasted proportion) if to its greater part is added the half of the whole line so proportionally divided. It will follow of necessity that the square of their conjoint [sum] be always quintuple that is 5 times the square of said integral half. Before one proceeds further it is to be clarified how said proportion among quantities is to be understood and interposed and how by the most wise in their volumes it is called. Wherefore I say it is called proportio habens medium et duo extrema that is proportion having the mean and two extremes. Which is a proper passion of every ternary. Because whatever ternary assigned it will always have the mean with its two extremes. Because the mean is never understood without them. And in such way is taught to divide a quantity in the 19. of the 6. having first described in the 3. definition of the 6. how so to divide it must be understood. Although in his 2. by the 11. he demonstrates to divide the line under the same virtue and force not otherwise naming proportion until the 5. had passed, and by Campanus is adduced among numbers in the 16. of the 9. And this as to its denomination.

(How its mean and its extremes are understood.)
Understood how our proportion by particular name is called, it remains to clarify how said mean and also extremes in whatever quantity represent themselves to be understood and how it is necessary they be conditioned, so that among them said divine proportion have to be found. For which thing it is to be known as in the fifth is assigned that always between three terms of a same genus of necessity are two habitudes or we want to say proportions that is one between the first term and the second, the other between the second and the third, verbi gratia. Let there be three quantities of same genus (for otherwise it is not understood there be proportion among them) let the first be a. and be 9. by number, the second b, and be 6. the third c. and be 4. I say that among them are two proportions one from a. to b. that is from 9. to 6. which among the common in our work we call sesquialtera and is when the greater term contains the lesser once and a half. Since 9. contains 6. and also 3. which is half of 6. and for this is called sesquialtera. But because here we do not intend to speak of proportions in genus having diffusely treated of it fully and clarified together with proportionalities in our pre-adduced work, however here of them I do not care otherwise to extend myself. But always all that in common said of them with their definitions and divisions is to be presupposed. And only of this unique [one] at present be our discourse for not finding treated of it with such and so useful process by anyone before. Now returning to the Incepted purpose of the three quantities, and let be also from the second b. to the third c. that is from 6. to 4. another proportion similarly sesquialtera. Of which whether they be similar or dissimilar at present we do not care. But only the intent is to clarify, how among three terms of same genus of necessity be found two proportions I say similarly our divine [one] observes the same conditions. That is that always among its three terms: that is mean and two extremes invariably contains two proportions always of a same denomination. Which thing of the others whether they be continuous or discontinuous can happen in infinite various ways. Since sometimes among their three terms will be duple sometimes triple: et sic in ceteris discoursing through all the common species. But between the mean and the extremes of this ours it is not possible to be able to vary as will be said. Wherefore deservedly was the fourth convenience with the supreme maker. And that it be connumerated among the other proportions without species and other difference serving the conditions of their definitions in this we can liken it to our savior who came not to dissolve the law but rather to fulfill it and with men conversed making himself subject and obedient to Mary and Joseph. So this our proportion sent from heaven accompanies itself with the others in definition and conditions and does not degrade them rather magnifies them more amply holding the principate of unity among all quantities indifferently and never changing as our saint Severinus says of the great god. videlicet Stabilisque manens dat cuncta moveri. For which thing it is to be known to be able to know it among occurring quantities that always among its three terms invariably it is found disposed in continuous proportionality in this way, that is that the product of the lesser extreme in the conjoint of the lesser and mean be equal to the square of the mean. And consequently by the 10. definition of the fifth said conjoint of necessity will be its greater extreme. And when so are found ordered three quantities in whatever genus those are called according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. Its greater extreme will always be the conjoint of the lesser and mean. That we can say said greater extreme to be the whole quantity divided in those two such parts that is lesser extreme and mean at that condition. And because it is to be noted said proportion not to be able to be rational, nor ever to be able to denominate the lesser extreme in the mean by any number the greater extreme being rational. Since always they will be irrational. As below will be said openly. And this in the third mode agrees with god vt supra.
