Cap. VIII.

(How is understood the quantity divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes.)

We must know that these things well noted [pertain] to dividing a quantity according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. That is to say of that to make two such unequal parts that the product of the smaller in all said undivided quantity be as much as the square of the greater part, as by the 3. definition of the 6. our philosopher declares. And therefore whenever in the case it were not named to divide said quantity According to the proportion having the mean and two extremes but only the case said to make of it two parts so conditioned that the product of one in all said quantity equals the square of the other part he who understands well and is expert in the art must reduce the proposal to said our proportion, because otherwise it cannot be interpreted, verbi gratia. Who would say make me of 10 two such parts that the one multiplied by 10 makes as much as the other multiplied in itself. This case and other similar ones operating according to the documents given by us in the speculative practice called algebra and almucabala by another name the rule of the thing placed in our pre-alleged work is found solved, one part that is the smaller to be 15 minus R. 125 [sqrt(125)]. and the other greater will be R. 125 minus 5. Which parts so described are irrational and in the art are called residues. Of which our philosopher assigns the species in the 79. of the 10. to be apotome. And vulgarly said parts are pronounced thus the smaller when one says 15 minus root of one hundred twenty-five. And such speaking means. Taken the R. of 125. which will be a little more than 11. And that subtracted from 15. which will remain a little more than 3. Or we want to say a little less than 4. And the greater is pronounced R. of 125 minus 5. And means taken the root of 125 which is a little more than 11 as is said and from that subtracted 5 which would remain a little more than 6 or we want to say a little less than 7 for said greater part. But similar acts of multiplying, summing, subtracting dividing of binomial residues and Roots and all other rational and irrational quantities whole and broken in all ways having fully demonstrated them in our prefaced work in this I do not care to repeat them and only attend to say new things and not to reiterate things already said. And [in] every quantity so divided we will always have three terms ordered in continuous proportionality that one will be the whole quantity so divided that is the greater extreme as here in the proposed case 10. And the other will be the greater part that is the mean. As is R. 125 minus 5. the third smaller will be 15 minus R. 125 between which will be the same proportion. That is from the first to the second as from the second to the third, and so conversely that is from the third to the second as from the second to the first. And it makes as much to multiply the smaller that is 15 minus R. 125 times the greater which is 10 as to multiply the mean in itself that is R. 125 minus 5 that the one and the other product will be 150 minus R. 12500 just as our proportion requires. And for this 10 will be said to be divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. and its greater part will be R. 125 minus 5. and the smaller will be 15 minus R. 125 that the one and the other of necessity will be irrational, as is proved by the sixth of the thirteenth, and also in the eleventh of the second and 16. of the 9. this for notice of the quantity so divided.



