Cap. XVIII.

(Of its 9th effect surpassing the others.)

If in the circle is formed the equilateral pentagon and to its two neighbor angles are subtended two straight lines moved from the terminals of its sides of necessity those between them will act to divide according to our proportion. And each of their greater parts always will be the side of said pentagon. Verbi gratia. Let the pentagon be a b c d e and from the extremes c. and a. is drawn the chord a c. which subtends to the angle b. And from the extremes b e. and is drawn the other chord b e. which subtends to the angle a. I say that these two lines a c and e. b divide themselves between them in the point f after the proportion having the mean and two extremes. and the greater part of each will be side of said pentagon exactly. Wherefore of the line ac. the greater part will be cf. and the greater of the line be. will be ef. each of these always will be equal to the side of the pentagon said. And by the Mathematicians said two lines by another name are called chords of the pentagonic angle. As if the said chords each were 10 because they will be equal being their pentagon in the circle equilateral cf. would be R. 125 minus 5 af. 15 minus R. 125 and the part ef. would be similarly R. 125 minus 5. and the bf. would be 15 minus R. 125. And the side of the pentagon would be similarly R. 125 minus 5, and this all with beautiful mode demonstrates the 11. of the 13. geometrically. And for this such effect we can by the notice of the side come to the notice of all its chords and of all their parts. And so by the adverse by the notice of the chords we can come to the notice of the side and of the parts of said chords. Operating arithmetically and geometrically as we have in our work above adduced taught to handle them with all diligence of binomials and other lines irrational, of which our philosopher treats in his 10. and by line he demonstrates it in the 11. of the 2. and in the 29. of the 6. So that easily one comes to the notice of the one and of the other in all modes which will be thing of greatest utility in our scientific and speculative occurrences.
