Cap. XXII.

(Of its 13th most worthy effect.)

For its 13. effect is not small admiration that without its suffrage one cannot ever form the pentagon that is figure of five equal sides above in the 9. effect adduced and below again to adduce without which pentagon as will be said it is not possible to be able to form nor imagine the most noble body above all the others said dodecahedron that is body of 12 equilateral and equiangular pentagons by another name called body of 12 pentagonal bases whose form as will be said. The divine Plato attributed to the 5. essence that is to the heaven for most convenient reasons. Wherefore our philosopher in the 4. book by the 10. teaches us to know how to make a triangle of this condition. That is that each of its two angles that stand on the base be double to the other. and this he did because wishing us to know how to form the equilateral pentagon and also equiangular and that to inscribe and circumscribe to the circle that is form it inside and outside exactly to the circle was not possible if first he had not instructed us to know how to make said triangle As by the 11. and 12 of said 4. appears, and for making said triangle. needs of necessity to divide a line according to our divine proportion as by said 10. of the 4. he shows us. Although in that place he does not say said line dividing itself under said proportion its conditions for not having us yet given notice what be proportion of which in his 5. he reserves because it is not his custom to induce in his demonstrations the things sequent of which yet one has not notice. But only uses the antecedent and this order is comprehended through all his 15. books, and therefore to the purpose of said triangle he does not say divide said line according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes but says according to the 11. of the 2. make of it two such parts that the square of one be equal to the product of the other part in all said line which thing in virtue means not other if not to divide it according to said proportion as appears by the 3. definition of the 6. and by the 29. of said and also we above in this said when was clarified how is understood the mean and its extremes about the first its effect adduced.
