Cap. XXV.

(How there cannot be more than 5 regular bodies.)

It is convenient now to show how there cannot be more than 5 such bodies in nature that is [that] all their bases be equal among them and solid and plane angles equal and similarly of equal sides which thing so appears because to the constitution of a solid angle at least is necessary the concourse of 3 superficial angles because only from two superficial angles one cannot finish a solid angle. Wherefore because the 3 angles of each equilateral hexagon are equal to [4] right angles. And also of the heptagon that is figure of 7 sides and generally of each figure of more sides equilateral and also equiangular its 3 angles always are greater than 4 right [angles] just as by the 32. of the first evidently appears and each solid angle is less than 4 right angles as testifies the 21. of the 11. And therefore it will be impossible that 3 angles of the hexagon and of the heptagon and generally of whatever figure of more sides equilateral and also equiangular form a solid angle. And by this is manifest that no solid figure equilateral and of equal angles can be formed of hexagonal surfaces or truly of more sides. Because if the 3 angles of the equilateral and also equiangular hexagon are greater than a solid angle, follows that 4. and more much more greatly will exceed said solid angle. But the 3 angles of the equilateral and also equiangular pentagon is manifest that they are less than 4 right angles. And the four are greater than 4 right. Wherefore from the 3 angles of an equilateral and also equiangular pentagon one can form the solid angle. But from its 4 angles or from more is not possible to form solid angle. And therefore only one body of equilateral and also equiangular pentagons will be formed, which is called dodecahedron otherwise body of 12 pentagons by the philosophers. In which the angles of the pentagons 3 by 3 form and contain all the solid angles of said body. The same reason will be in the quadrilateral figures of equal sides and angles: as in the pentagons was said. Because every quadrilateral figure if it will be equilateral and also of equal angles that by the definition will be square, because all its angles will be right as is shown by the 32 of the first. Wherefore from 3 angles then of such superficial figure will be possible to form a solid angle. But from 4 of them and from more is impossible. For which thing from such superficial figures which provided that they be quadrilateral equilateral and of equal angles of them can be formed one solid which we call cube which is a body contained by 6 square surfaces and has 12 sides and 8 solid angles. And of the equilateral triangles the 6 angles are equal to 4 right by said 32. of the first. Therefore less than 6 are less than 4 right, and more than 6 are greater than 4 right. And therefore from 6 angles and from more of similar triangles one cannot form a solid angle, but from 5. and from 4. and from 3. one can form. And provided that 3 angles of the equilateral triangle contain a solid angle therefore from equilateral triangles is formed the body of 4 triangular bases of equal sides called tetrahedron, And when concur 4 such triangles is formed the body of 8 bases called octahedron. And if 5 equilateral triangles contain a solid angle then is formed the body called icosahedron of 20 triangular bases and of equal sides. Wherefore why be so many and such the regular bodies and why others be not more for that which we have said fully will be manifest etc.
