Cap. XXVI.

(Of the fabric or formation of those 5 regular [bodies] and of the proportion of each to the diameter of the sphere and first of the tetrahedron).

Seen and understood what be the regular bodies and how many exactly follows now to say how they are formed so that they be exactly surrounded by a sphere and also what proportion and denote of them or their sides to the diameter of the sphere that exactly surrounded them. by means of which one comes into notice of them all. And therefore first we will speak of the tetrahedron that is of the 4 bases equilateral triangular and then of each of the others successively by order following will be said.

I say then said body ought to be so formed, that is first let be taken the diameter of the sphere in which we intend to place it which we place that it be the line ab. And this divide in the point c. in mode that the part ac. be double to the part bc, And make above it the semicircle adb. and draw the line cd perpendicular above the line ab. and draw the lines bd. and da. Then make the circle fgh. above the center e. of which the semidiameter be equal to the line cd. In which circle then make an equilateral triangle: according to what teaches the second of the 4. And this triangle be fgh. And from the center to its angles draw the lines ef. eg. eh. Afterwards above the center: e. lift the line ek. perpendicular to the surface of the circle fgh. as teaches the 12 of the 11. And this perpendicular place equal to the line ac. And from the point k let fall the hypotenuses kf. kg. kh. Which things so exactly observed I say to be finished the pyramid of 4 equilateral triangular bases of equal sides. And this exactly will be circumscribed by the sphere of that such diameter ab. And I say for the proportion between the diameter of the sphere the side of the fabricated pyramid the square of said diameter to be sesquialtera to the square of the side of said pyramid. that is that the square of the diameter contains the square of the side of the pyramid once and a half: that is as 3 to 2 or 6 to 4. And means that if the square of said diameter were 6 the square of the side of the pyramid would be 4. And so is found proved in geometry.
