Cap. XXVII.

(Of the fabric of the cube and its proportion to the sphere.)

Follows to demonstrate how is formed the cube and what be the proportion between its side and the diameter of the sphere that exactly surrounded it, for which thing I say said cube ought to be so formed that is. First let be taken the diameter of the sphere. In which we intend exactly to place it. And this be the line ab. above which I will make the semicircle adb. And then I will divide the diameter in the point c. just as I did in the formation of the preceding pyramid. That is that the part ac. be double to the part bc. And draw the line cd. perpendicular to the line ab. And draw also the lines db. and da. Then let be made a square of which all the sides be equal to the line bd. And be that such square efgh. And above its 4 angles lift 4 lines perpendicular to the surface of said square as teaches the twelfth of the eleventh. And these such perpendiculars each be placed also equal to the line bd. and be said 4 perpendiculars ek. fl. gm. hn. And will be these 4 perpendiculars each equidistant to the other among them by the sixth of said eleventh. And the angles by them and by the sides of the square contained are right by the definition of the line perpendicular to the surface. Then join the extremities of these perpendiculars drawing the lines kl. lm. mn. nk. Which things with diligence exactly observed will be finished the cube that we sought to form, by 6 square surfaces contained which is proved by the 34. [and] 7 of the first the 4 surfaces that surround it and are those of which the opposite sides are the 4 perpendiculars are all square. Of the base that it be square this is manifest by our proposition. And also that the supreme surface be also it square that is klmn. is demonstrated also by said 34. of the first and by the tenth of the eleventh. And so also by the fourth of said eleventh is manifest all the sides of said cube stand orthogonally above its two opposite surfaces. And this such exactly by the sphere of the proposed diameter will be circumscribed. Wherefore always said diameter will be triple in power to the side of said cube that is that the square of said diameter will be three times of the square of the side of the cube. As if the diameter were R. 300 the side of the cube would agree to be 10 exactly. Whose notice to many necessary cases will be opportune. etc.
