Cap. XXVIII.

(How is formed the octahedron in sphere exactly placable and its proportion to the sphere.)

In the third place succeeds in fabric the body of 8 triangular bases called octahedron which similarly by a proposed sphere be exactly surrounded of which sphere only the diameter to us be known. And it is made in this mode. Let be taken the diameter of the sphere which be the line ab. which divide by equals in the point c. And above all the line make the semicircle adb. and draw cd. perpendicular to the line ab. and then join the point d. with the extremities of said diameter that is with a. and with b. Then let be made a square of which all the sides be equal to the line bd. And be this square efgh. And in this square draw two diameters of which one be eg and the other fh. Which between them divide themselves in the point k. Wherefore by the fourth of the first will be manifest that each of these diameters equal to the line ab. which was placed diameter of the sphere since the angle d. be right by the first part of the thirtieth of the third. And also each of the angles e. f. g. h. be right by the definition of the square. And also will be manifest that those two diameters eg. and fh. between them divide themselves by equals in the point k. And appears by the fifth and thirty-second and sixth of the first easily deducing. Now lift above k the line kl. perpendicular to the surface of the square, the which perpendicular place equal to the half of the diameter eg or truly fh. And then let fall the hypotenuses le. lf. lg. lh. And all these hypotenuses by the things said and presupposed by means of the penultimate of the first replicated as many times be need among them will be equal. And also equal to the sides of the square. Therefore until here we have a pyramid of 4 equilateral triangular bases constituted above said square which pyramid will be the half of the body of 8 bases which we intend. Then under said square we will make another pyramid similar to this in this mode that is. We will draw said line lk. piercing and penetrating the said square up to the point m in mode that the line km. which stands under the square be equal to the line lk which stands above said square. And then join the point m. with all the angles of the square drawing 4 other hypotenuse lines which are me. mf. mg. mh. And these also are proved to be equal among them and also to the sides of said square by the penultimate of the first and the others above adduced as was proved of the other hypotenuses above the square. And so always with diligence observed the above said things will be finished the body of 8 equilateral triangular bases the which exactly will be by the sphere circumscribed. The proportion between the sphere and said body is that the square of the diameter of the sphere to the square of the side of said body be double exactly that is if said diameter were 8 the side of the octobase would be R. 32. whose powers among them are in duple proportion that is that the square of the diameter will be double to the square of the side of said body and so we have the fabric and the proportion respect the sphere etc.
