Cap. XXIX.

(Of the fabric and formation of the body called icosahedron.)

Knowing how to make the body of 20 equilateral triangular bases that exactly by a given sphere that has the rational diameter be surrounded. And will be evidently the side of said body a line irrational that is that which will be called minor line. Verbi gratia. Let be still here the diameter of the given sphere to which place to be rational either in length or only in power. And divide in the point c. In mode that ac. be quadruple of cb. and make above it the semicircle adb. and draw cd. perpendicular to ab. and draw the line db. Then according to the quantity of the line db. make the circle efghk. above the center l to which inscribe an equilateral pentagon of the same noted. To the angles of which from the center l sow the lines le. lf. lg. lh. lk. And also in the same circle make an equilateral decagon. Divide then all the arcs by equals of which the chords are the sides of the pentagon. And from the mid points to the extremity of all the sides, of the inscribed pentagon direct straight lines. And also above all the angles of said pentagon direct the cathetus [perpendicular] as teaches the twelfth of the eleventh the which each also be equal to the line bd. And join the extremities of these 5 catheti with 5 corausti [radii/struts]. And will be by the sixth of the eleventh the 5 catheti so directed among them equidistant. And since that they be equal will be also by the thirty-third of the first the 5 corausti which join their extremities equal to the sides of the pentagon. Let fall then from each summit of all the catheti two and two hypotenuses to the two surrounding angles of the inscribed decagon. And the extremities of these ten hypotenuses which descend from the 5 extremities of the catheti to the 5 points which are each mid angles of the inscribed decagon join forming another pentagon in said circle. The which also will be equilateral by the twenty-third of the third. And when you will have done this you will see that you will have made 10 triangles of which the sides are the 10 hypotenuses and the 5 corausti. and the 5 sides of this inscribed pentagon. And that these triangles be equilateral so you will learn it. Since as much the semidiameter of the described circle as that each of the directed catheti be equal to the line bd. by the hypothesis will be by the corollary of the 15. of the 4 each of the catheti equal to the side of the equilateral hexagon made in the circle of which the diameter will be equal to the line bd. And because by the penultimate of the first each of the 10 hypotenuses is as much more powerful [has greater square] than the cathetus as much powers [as is the square of] the side of the decagon also by the tenth of the thirteenth the side of the pentagon is as much more powerful than the same as much powers the same side of the decagon will be by the common science each of these hypotenuses equal to the side of the pentagon. And of the corausti already has been shown that they be equal to the sides of the pentagon. Wherefore all the sides of these 10 triangles or truly are sides of the equilateral pentagon the second time to the circle inscribed or truly to those equal. Are then said triangles equilateral. Also more above the center of the circle which be the point l direct another cathetus equal to the first ones which be lm. And its superior extremity which be the point m join with each extremity of the first with 5 corausti. And will be by the sixth of the eleventh this central cathetus that is which will be directed in the center equidistant to each of the angular catheti. And therefore by the thirty-third of the first these 5 corausti will be equal to the semidiameter of the circle and by the corollary of the fifteenth of the fourth each will be as side of the hexagon.

Then to said central cathetus from one and the other part join a line equal to the side of the decagon that is above upwards join mn. And downwards under the circle join from the center of the circle lp. Then let fall from the point n 5 hypotenuses to the 5 superior angles of the 10 triangles which are internal to the circuit. And from the point p. other 5 to the other 5 inferior angles. And will be these 10 hypotenuses equal among them to the sides of the inscribed pentagon by the penultimate of the first and by the tenth of the thirteenth just as of the other 10 was demonstrated before. You have then the body of 20 triangular and equilateral bases of which all the sides are equal to the sides of the pentagon. And its diameter will be the line np. And of these 20. triangles 10 of them stand in the circuit above the circle, And 5 lift themselves up concurrent to the point n. And the other 5 concur below the circle in the point p. And this body called icosahedron so formed that the given sphere exactly surrounds it so will be manifest. Since the line lm. be equal to the side of the hexagon. And the line mn. to the side of the decagon which be equilateral circumscribed both of the same circle efg. all ln. will be by the ninth of the thirteenth divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes in the point m. and its greater part will be the line lm. divide then lm. by equals in the point q. and will be by the common science pq. equal to qn. because pl. was placed equal to the side of the decagon just as mn. Wherefore qn. will be the 1/2 of np. just as qm. will be half of ml. Since then that the square nq. be by the third of the thirteenth quintuple to the square qm. will be also by the fifteenth of the fifth the square pn. quintuple to the square lm. Because by the fourth of the second the square pn. will be quadruple to the square qn. And the square also lm. quadruple to the square qm. by the same. And the quadruple to the quadruple will be as the simple: to the simple as affirms the fifteenth of the fifth. And the square ab will be quintuple to the square bd. by the second part of the corollary of the eighth of the sixth. And by the corollary of the seventeenth of the same. Because ab. also is quintuple to bc. Because ac was to the same quadruple. Because then lm. will be by the hypothesis equal to bd. will be by the common science ab. equal to np. Wherefore if above the line np. is made the semicircle. Which if led around until it returns to the first place whence it commenced to move that sphere which will be made by its motion will be (by the definition of equal spheres) equal to the sphere proposed. And because the line lm. will be in the mean place proportional between ln. and nm. And therefore between ln. and pl. Will be also each semidiameter of the circle in the mean place proportional between ln. and lp. And since lm. be equal to the semidiameter of the circle. Wherefore the semicircle described above pn. will pass through all the points of the circumference of the circle efg. And therefore also through all the angles of the fabricated solid which stand in that circumference. And because by the same reason all the corausti (which join the extremities of the angular catheti with the extremity of the central) are in the mean place proportional between pm. and mn. Since each of them be equal to lm. Follows that the same semicircle passes also through the other angles of the icosahedral figure so fabricated. Will be then this such body inscribable in the sphere of which the diameter be pn. And therefore also to the sphere of which the diameter be ab. And the side of this solid figure I say to be the line minor. Because it is manifest that the line bd be rational in power since its square be the fifth of the square of the line ab. which was placed rational either in length or truly only in power. Wherefore the semidiameter and the semidiameters of the circle efg. will be also rational in power. Because its semidiameter will be equal to bd. Therefore by the twelfth of the thirteenth the side of the pentagon equilateral to this inscribed circle will be the line minor. And also just as in the process of this demonstration was shown the side of this figure is as much as the side of the pentagon. Then the side of this figure of 20 equilateral triangular bases will be the line minor just as is presupposed.
