Cap. XXX.

(Knowing how to make the body of 12 equilateral pentagonal bases and equiangular that exactly the proposed sphere surrounds it.)

And will be the side of said body manifestly irrational that which will be called residue.

Let be made a cube according to what teaches the given mode that the assigned sphere surrounds it exactly. And be of this cube the two surfaces ad. and ac. And let us imagine now that ab. be the supreme surface of this. And the surface ac. be one of the lateral. And be the line ad. common to these two surfaces. Divide then in the surface ab. the two opposite sides by equals that is db. and the side to it opposite. And the points of the division continue by the line ef. And the side also ad. and that which to it is opposite in the surface ac. Divide by equals and the points of the division continue by a straight line of which the 1/2 be gh and be the point h the mid point of the line ad. Similarly the line ef. divide by equals in the point k. And draw hk. Each then of the three lines ek. kf. and gh. you will divide according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes in the 3 points l. m. q. And be their greater parts lk. km. and gq. Which will be manifest to be equal since all the divided lines be equal that is each of them to the 1/2 of the side of the cube. Then at the two points l. and m. direct the perpendiculars (as teaches the twelfth of the eleventh) to the surface ab. of which each you will place equal to the line kl. And be ln. and mp. Similarly from the point q. direct perpendicularly qr to the surface ac the which you will place equal to gq. Draw then the lines al. an. am. ap. dm. dl. dp. dn. ar. aq. dr. dq. Will be manifest then by the fifth of the thirteenth that the two lines ke and el. in power are triple to the line kl. And therefore also to the line ln. since kl. and ln. be equal. And also ke will be equal to ea. Therefore the two lines ae. and el. are in power triple to the line ln. Wherefore by the penultimate of the first al. will be in power triple to ln. And therefore by the same an. will be in power quadruple to ln. And since every line in power quadruple to its half follows by the common science that an. will be double in length to ln. And because lm. will be double to lk. And also kl. and ln. are equal will be an equal to lm. Because their halves are equal And because by the thirty-third of the first lm. will be equal to np will be an. equal to np. And by the same mode you will prove the 3 lines pd. dr. and ra. to be among them equal and to the two predicted. We have then by these 5 lines the equilateral pentagon which is anpdr. But perhaps you will say that it be not pentagon. Because perhaps it is not all in a same surface which thing is necessary so that it be pentagon. And that it be all in a same surface so you will learn it let issue from the point k the line ks. perpendicular to the surface ab. the which be equal to lk. And will be for this equal to each of the two ln. and mp. And since it be equidistant to each of them by the sixth of the eleventh. And therefore with both in the same surface by the definition of the equidistant lines will be necessary that the point s. be in the line np. And that it divide it by equals. Draw then the two lines rh. and hs. Wherefore the two triangles ksh. and qrh. are above an angle (that is khq) constituted. And will be the proportion of kh. to qr, as of ks. to qh. Because just as gh. to qr. so kh. to qr. by the 7. of the 5. And as rq. to qh. so ks. to qh. by the same. But qh. to qr. as qr. to qh. Since qr. will be equal to gq. Therefore by the 30. of the 6. the line rhs. will be line one. Wherefore by the 2. of the 11. all the pentagon of which we dispute will be in a same surface. I say also it to be equiangular which so will that appear. Because since ek. be divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. And km. be equal to its greater part will be also by the 4 of the 13. and all em. divided according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes and its greater part also the line ek. And therefore by the 5. the two lines em. and mk. And therefore the two em. and mp. Because mp. will be equal to mk. are in power triple to the line ek. And therefore also to the line ae, Because ae. will be equal to ek. Wherefore the 3 lines ae. em. and mp. are in power quadruple to the line ae. Will be clear also by the penultimate of the first two times replicated that the line ap. will be in power equal to the 3 lines ae. em. and mp. Wherefore ap will be in power quadruple to the line, ae. And the side of the cube since it be double to the line ae. will be also in power quadruple to it by the 4. of 2.

Therefore by the common science ap. will be equal to the side of the cube. And since ad be one of the sides of the cube will be ap. equal to ad. And therefore by the 8. of the first the angle ard. will be equal to the angle anp. In the same mode you will prove the angle dnp. to be equal to the angle dra. Because you will place the line dn. to be in power quadruple to the 1/2 of the side of the cube. Since then that by these things said the pentagon be equilateral and have 3 angles equal it will be equiangular by the 7. of the 13. If then by this way and similar reason above each of the other sides of the cube we will fabricate an equilateral and equiangular pentagon will be finished a solid of 12 pentagonal surfaces equilateral and also equiangular contained. Because the cube has 12 sides. Remains now to demonstrate that this such solid be exactly surrounded by the sphere given which so will appear. that is. Draw then from the line sk. two surfaces which divide the cube of which one divides it above the line hk. the other above the line ef. And will be by the 40. of the 11. that the common division of these two surfaces divides the diameter of the cube and so by converse that it be divided by said diameter by equals. Be then their common division up to the diameter of the cube the line ko. In mode that the point o be center of the cube. And lead the lines oa. oa. op. od. or. And will be clear that each of the two lines oa. and od. will be semidiameter of the cube and therefore are equal. And of the line ok. will be clear by the 40. of the 11. that she will be equal to ek. that is to the 1/2 of the side of cube. And because ks. will be equal to km. will be os divided in the point k according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. and its greater part will be the line ok. the which will be equal to ek. Wherefore by the 5. of the 13. will be the two lines os. and sk. And therefore also os. and sp. Because sp. (to which this demonstration does not extend) will be equal to ks. triple in power to the line ok. And therefore to the 1/2 of the side of the cube. Wherefore by the penultimate of the 1. the line op will be in power triple to the 1/2 of the side of the cube. And by the corollary of the 14. of the 13. is manifest that the semidiameter of the sphere is triple in power to the 1/2 of the side of the cube which will be circumscribed by the same sphere. Wherefore op. will be as much as the semidiameter of the sphere that surrounds exactly the cube proposed. By the same reason all the lines drawn from the point o, to each of the angles of all the pentagons formed above the sides of the cube. that is to all the angles which are proper to the pentagons. And not to those which are common to them and to the surfaces of the cube that is proper of point just as are the three angles n. p. r. in the formed pentagon. And of those lines that come from the point o. to all the angles of the pentagons which are common to the pentagons and to the surfaces of the cube just as are in the present pentagon the two angles a. and d. will be clear that they are equal to the semidiameter of the sphere that exactly the cube surrounds. Because they are diameters of the cube by the 40. of the 11. But the semidiameter of the cube will be as to the semidiameter of the sphere that exactly surrounds it just as appears by the reasoning of the 14. of the 13. Therefore all the lines led from the point o. to all the angles of the dodecahedron that is of the solid contained by 12 pentagonal surfaces equilateral and equiangular that so is called in Greek are equal among them and to the semidiameter of the sphere. Wherefore if the semicircle lined above all the diameter of the sphere or truly of the cube if one leads it around will pass through all its angles. Wherefore by the definition it will be surrounded exactly by the sphere assigned. I say also that the side of this figure will be line irrational that is that which is called residue if the diameter of the sphere that exactly surrounds it be rational in length or truly in power which so appears. Since the diameter of the sphere by the 14. of the 13. be triple in power to the side of the cube will be the side of the cube rational in power if the diameter of the sphere will be rational in length or truly in power And by the 11. of the 13. will be clear that the line rp. divides the line ad. Which is side of the cube, according to the proportion having the mean and two extremes. And that its greater part will be equal to the side of the pentagon. And because its greater part will be residue by the 6. of the 13. is manifest the side of the figure called dodecahedron to be residue which thing we have wished to demonstrate.
