Cap. XXXI.

(To find the sides of all 5 regular bodies.)

The sides of the 5 bodies aforesaid circumscribed all exactly by a same sphere of which sphere to us the diameter only be proposed and by said diameter to know how to find. Verbi gratia. Let ab be the diameter of any sphere to us proposed by which to us needs the sides of the 5 predicted bodies to find again which all are understood in a same sphere placed of which touching one of its angles they touch all that is that exactly said sphere all surrounds. Which thing so we will do that is. We divide then this diameter in the point c. In mode that ac. be double to cb. And by equals in the point d. And we will make above it the semicircle afb. at the circumference of which be drawn two lines perpendicular to the line ab. which be ce. and df. And join e. with a. and with b. It is manifest then by the demonstration of the 13. of the 13. that ac. will be side of the figure of 4 triangular and equilateral bases, And by the demonstration of the 14. of said that eb will be side of the cube. And by the demonstration of the 15. that fb will be side of the figure of 8 triangular and equilateral bases. And be then from the point a the line ag perpendicular. to ab. and also equal to the same ab. And join g. with d. and be h. the point in which gd. divides the circumference of the semicircle. And lead hk. perpendicular to ab. And because ga. will be double to ad. will be by the 4. of the 6. hk. double to kd. Because are the two triangles gad and. hkd. equiangular by the thirty-second of the first. Since the angle a of the greater will be equal to the angle k of the minor because each is right the angle d. will be common to one and the other. Therefore by the fourth of the second hk. will be quadruple in power to kd. Therefore by the penultimate of the first hd. will be in power quintuple to kd. And since db. be equal to hd. (Because d. will be center of the semicircle) will be also db. in power quintuple to kd. And since all ab. be double to all bd. just as ac. subtracted from the first ab will be double to cb. drawn from the second bd. And will be by the nineteenth of the fifth bc. remaining of the first double to ed residue of the second. And therefore all bd. will be triple to de. Therefore the square bd. will be nonuplo that is nine times of the square ed. And because it was only quintuple to the square kd. will be by the second part of the tenth of the fifth the square de. less of the square kd and for this de. less of kd. Be then dm. equal to kd. And go mn. up to the circumference which be perpendicular to ab. and join n. with b. Since then that dk. and dm. be equal will be by the definition of that which some line from the center to be equidistant the two lines hk. and mn. equally distant from the center. And therefore equal among them by the 2. part of the 13. of the 3. and by the 2. part of the 3. of said. Wherefore mn. will be equal to mk. Because hk. was equal to it. And because ab. will be double to bd. and km. double to dk. And the square bd. quintuple to the square dk. will be by the 15. of the fifth the square ab. similarly quintuple to the square km because it is so that the square of the double to the square of the double, as the square of the simple to the square of the simple. And by the demonstration of the 16. will be manifest that the diameter of the sphere will be in power quintuple as to the side of the hexagon of the circle of the figure of 20. bases. Therefore km. will be equal to the side of the hexagon of the circle of the figure of 20. bases. Because the diameter of the sphere which will be ab. will be in power quintuple as to the side of the hexagon of the circle of that figure as to km. And also by the demonstration of the same will be manifest that the diameter of the sphere will be composed of the side of the hexagon and of two sides of the decagon of the circle of the figure of 20. bases. Since then that km. be as the side of the hexagon. And also ak. be equal to mb. Because they are the residues or you want to say remaining of the equal, taken away the equal will be mb. as the side of the decagon. Because then mn. will be as side of the hexagon because it will be equal to km. will be by the penultimate of the first and by the 10. of the 13. nb. as the side of the pentagon of the figure of the circle of 20. bases. And because by the demonstration of the 16. of said appears that the side of the pentagon of the circle of the figure of 20. bases will be side of the same figure of 20 bases will be clear the line nb. to be side of this figure. Divide then eb. (which will be side of the cube by the proposed sphere exactly surrounded) according to proportionem habens medium duoque extrema in the point p. and be its greater part pb. will be clear then by the demonstration of the preceding that pb. will be side of the figure of 12 bases. Are then found the sides of the 5 bodies anteposed by means of the diameter of the sphere only to us proposed which sides are these that is ae. of the pyramid of 4 bases eb. side of the cube. fb. side of the 8. bases that is nb. side of the 20. bases and the line pb. side of the 12. bases.

And which be greater of these sides than the others to them so appears. Because it is clear that ae. will be greater of fb. because the arc ae will be greater of the arc fb. and also fb. will be greater of eb. and eb. greater of nb. And also I say nb. to be greater than pb. Because since ac. be double of cb. will be by the fourth of the 2. the square ac. quadruple to the square cb. And by the second part of the corollary of the 8. of the 6. and by the corollary of the 17. of said will be clear that the square ab will be triple to the square be. But by the 21. of the 6. the square ab. to the square be will be as the square be to the square cb. because the proportion of ab. to be. will be as of be to bc. by the second part of the corollary of the 8. of the 6. Wherefore by the 11. of the 5. the square be. will be triple to the square cb. And because the square ac will be quadruple to the same square as has been shown will be by the first part of the 10. of the 5. the square ac. less of the square be. And therefore the line ac. will be greater of the line be. And therefore am. much more greater and already is manifest by the ninth of the thirteenth, that if the line am. will be divided according to proportionem habens medium duoque extremo will be its greater part the line km. which will be equal to mn. and also when bc. divides itself according to the same proportion that is habens medium duoque extrema its greater part will be the line pb. Since then that all am. be greater than all be. will be mn. which will be equal to the greater part am. greater than pb. which will be the greater part of eb. And this will be manifest by the second of the 14. book, which without help of any of those which follow with firm demonstration fortifies itself. Therefore by the 19. of the first much more strongly nb. will be greater than pb. Wherefore appears the sides of the five bodies aforesaid which with that same order that among them they follow with that among them they exceed. Only this has the instance, that is one does not observe such order in the cube and in the octahedron. that is in the 8 bases. Because the side of the octobase precedes to the side of the cube, although the cube precedes to the octahedron in fabric and formation as in the 13. appears and is not without mystery. Wherefore in the formation the cube proposes itself to the octahedron because by the same division of the diameter of the sphere proposed is found the side of the pyramid of 4 triangular bases and the side of the cube, Will be then ae. side of the Pyramid greater of the sides of all the other bodies. And after him will be fb. Side of the 8 bases, greater of the sides of all the other bodies that after him follow. And in the 3 place follows in greatness eb. side of the cube. And in the 4. place will be nb. side of the 20 bases, that is icosahedron. And the minimum of all will be pb. side of the dodecahedron that is of the 12 pentagonal bases.
