Cap. XXXII.

(Of the proportion of said regular [bodies] among them and their dependents.)

Having understood the sufficiency of said 5 regular bodies and shown the impossibility to be more of 5 with the mode in them dependent to proceed in infinite follows to have to give mode to their proportions between one and the other and the other and the one and as to capacity and continence and as to their surfaces. And then of the inclusions of the one in the other and by converse and first of their corporeal air [area/volume]. The proportions of the one to the other always will be irrational by respect of our proportion above adduced which in their compositions and formations interposes itself as said except of the tetrahedron and the cube and the octahedron by the precision exactly of their proportions to the diameter of the sphere in the which they are inscribed could sometimes perhaps be rational but that of the icosahedron and that of the dodecahedron to which one wants compared never can be rational for the reason said. And therefor here does not seem to me Exalted Duke other to have to say because would be to increase the volume of infinite irrationalities in which more readily the intellect would come to confuse itself than learn pleasure: to the which end our study always will be intent and that so much as to this seems to me to have to be enough that in the particular our treatise of said bodies composed in our work said to which for the multitude to the universe communicated easy will be the recourse. And by means of their dimensions in that place put according to the peregrination of the wits always one will be able with the utility to bring back great delight. And so similarly I say of all their dependents of which in that place as many enough are placed. True is that by the 10. of the 14. the proportion of the dodecahedron to the icosahedron when both be made in the same sphere is concluded to be exactly as that of all its surfaces to all the surfaces of that together joined. And the 16. of said says the octahedron to be divisible in 2 pyramids of height equal which will be equal to the semidiameter of the sphere where it were fabricated and their bases are square. The which superficial square will be on the double to the square of the diameter of the sphere. The which notice to us for its measure enough helps and by means of that to many others often one can come.
