Cap. XXXIII.

(Of the proportion of all their surfaces one to the other.)

Their surfaces exalted Duke among them similarly [we] can say to the same mode to be proportional as of their corporeal mass was said that is irrational for the malice of the pentagonal figure which in the dodecahedron interposes itself. But of the others can sometimes be rational as those of the tetrahedron cube octahedron for being triangular and square and known in proportion with the diameter of their sphere in which they are formed as was seen above. True is that the 8. of the 14. concludes all the surfaces of the 12 pentagonal bases to all the surfaces of 20 triangular bases that is of the dodecahedron to those of the icosahedron to be as that of the side of the cube to the side of the triangle of the body of 20 bases when all said bodies be exactly contained or circumscribed by a same sphere. The why does not seem to me with silence to pass the admirable convenience among them in their bases that is that the bases of the dodecahedron and those of the icosahedron each be exactly circumscribed by a same circle as shows the 5. of said 14. which thing will be of worthy note and this when in the same sphere they will be fabricated. And of the surfaces all of the tetrahedron to the surfaces all of the octahedron will be the proportion known by the 14. of said 14. since one of the bases of the tetrahedron be one so much and one third of one of the bases of the octahedron that is in sesquitertian proportion which will be when the greater contains the smaller once and a third just as 8. to 6. and that of 12 to 9. And the proportion of all the surfaces of the octahedron together joined to all those of the tetrahedron together joined will be sesquialtera that is one so much and a half as if those of the octahedron were 6 and those 4 which will be when the greater contains the smaller once and half when they be of a same sphere. And all those of the tetrahedron joined with those of the octahedron compose a surface called medial as wants the 13. of said 14. And all the surfaces of the hexahedron that is cube equal themselves to the double of the square of the diameter of the sphere that circumscribes it and the perpendicular that from the center of the sphere to each of the bases of said cube is drawn always will be equal to the half of the side of said cube by the last of the 14. that is if said diameter were 4 all said surfaces would be 32 and if said perpendicular were 1 the side of the cube would be 2. Of which proportions and surfaces to have fully in our work treated to this be supplement with those of the dependent in all modes with diligence operating by algebra.
