Cap. XLIX.

(Of the hexahedron plane solid or true vacuum abscinded solid or true vacuum elevated plane and elevated abscinded.)

VII. VIII. The hexahedron or we want to say cube plane solid or true vacuum has 12 lines or true sides or ribs and 24 superficial angles and 8 solid and 6 bases or true surfaces which contain it all square equilateral and also equiangular similar to the form of the diabolical instrument otherwise called die or true taxillo.

IX. X. The hexahedron cut or true abscinded similarly solid or true vacuum has 24 lines which about it cause 48 superficial angles of which 24 are right and the others acute. And has 12 solid and implies to be contained by 14 surfaces or true bases that is by 6 square and 8 triangular. And all the said lines are common to the squares and to the trigons because those 6 square joined together angulariter of necessity cause 8 triangles just as made the hexagons in the abscinded tetrahedron. And born from the cube cut uniform in the half of each its side as demonstrates to the eye its proposed material form.

XI. XII. The hexahedron elevated solid or true vacuum to its constitution of necessity concur 36 lines which among them applied cause 72 superficial angles and 6 solid pyramidal by 4 superficial each contained. And will be clothed by 24 triangular surfaces which properly are not to be called bases. And of those lines 12 of them are common to all those superficial triangles that contain and surround it and will be composed said body of 6 laterated quadrilateral extrinsic pyramids which to the eye all present themselves according to the situation of the body. And also of the intrinsic cube above which said pyramids pose themselves and only the intellect imagines it. because to the eye all hides itself for the superposition to it of said pyramids and of that cube the its 6 square surfaces are bases of said 6 pyramids that are all of same height and are hidden from the eye and surround occultly said cube.

XIII. XIV. The hexahedron abscinded elevated solid or true vacuum has lines or true sides or ribs 72. and these make 144. superficial angles and of solid makes 14. all pyramidal. Of which 6 are of Pyramids laterated quadrangular and 8 of trilateral pyramids and said lines 24 of them are common to the trigonal and tetragonal pyramids. And has 48 faces or true surfaces that surround it all triangular and this so made body is composed of the hexahedron cut solid intrinsic by intellect only perceptible and of 14 pyramids as is said ejected in plane space always stops itself above 3 pyramidal cones given or true points as the form demonstrates.
