Cap. LI.

(Of the icosahedron plane solid or true vacuum and of the abscinded solid or true vacuum and of the elevated solid or true vacuum.)

XXII. XXIII. The icosahedron plane solid or true vacuum contains 30 lines or true sides all among them equal and these in it cause 60 superficial angles and 12 solid. And also form in it 20 bases all equilateral triangular and equiangular and each of said solid angles are made or true contained by 5 superficial angles of said triangular bases as its figure similarly material demonstrates it.

XXIII. XXIV. The icosahedron abscinded plane solid or true vacuum has 90 sides or true lines and so has 180 superficial angles of which 120 are of the triangles to its composition concurrent and 60 are of the pentagons that also to that convene which all are equilateral. And these lines form around said body 32 bases of which 20 are hexagonal that is of 6 equal sides and 12 of them are pentagonal that is of 5 equal sides. And each in their degree are among them equilateral, and also equiangular that is that all the hexagons among them are of equal angles and so the pentagons among them are of equal angles. But the sides all yes of pentagons as of the hexagons all among them are equal. Only in the angles are different the pentagons, and the hexagons. And this so made body born from the preceding regular when each its side in its third part uniform cuts itself. And of such cuts are caused 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons as is said and 30 corporeal angles or true solid. But of said lines 60 of them are common to the hexagons and pentagons because of the 20 hexagons together uniformly joined of necessity cause 20 pentagons and of these also one cannot give the elevated for the defect of said hexagon as in the abscinded tetrahedron and of the abscinded octahedron above said we have.

XXV. XXVI. The icosahedron elevated solid or true vacuum in itself has 90 lines and has 180 superficial angles and 20 solid pyramidal and has 60 bases or true surfaces that surround it all equilateral triangular and also equiangular. But of the 90 lines 30 of them are common to each of the surfaces of its 20 pyramids. And will be composed said body of 20 laterated triangular equilateral and equiangular pyramids of equal height and of the icosahedron integral interior by only imagination from the intellect perceptible and its bases are bases similarly of said 20 pyramids. Which all also the proper form its material makes open.
