Cap. LII.

(Of the dodecahedron plane solid or true vacuum and of the abscinded solid or true vacuum and of the elevated solid or true vacuum and of the abscinded elevated solid or true vacuum and its origin or true dependence.)

XXVII. XXVIII. The dodecahedron plane solid or true vacuum has 30 equal lines or true sides which in it cause 60 superficial angles and has 20 solid angles and has 12 bases or true surfaces which contain it and these are all pentagonal of sides and angles among them all equal as appears.

XXIX. XXX. The dodecahedron cut or true abscinded plane solid or true vacuum has 60 lines all of equal length and has 120 superficial angles and has 30 solid. But of the 120 superficial 60 are of triangles and 60 are of pentagons. And those triangles of necessity are caused by said pentagons if angularly among them [they] join. As in the causation of those of the abscinded tetrahedron and octahedron was said which from hexagons and quadrangles and triangles were formed so in those of the abscinded icosahedron from hexagons and pentagons as the material figure demonstrates. And each of said solid angles will be made and contained by 4 superficial angles of the which 2 are of triangles and two are of pentagon concurrent at a same point. And all its lines or true sides are common to the triangles and to the pentagons because the one and the others together duly applied the one is cause of the other that is the triangles of the pentagons and the pentagons of the triangles. And just as the 12 equilateral pentagons angularly joined form in said body 20 triangles so also we can say that 20 equilateral triangles angularly among them joined cause 12 pentagons similarly equilateral. And by this appears all said lines among them to be common as is said. And the surfaces that surround these are 32. Of which 12 are equilateral and equiangular pentagonal and 20 are pure triangular equilateral all among them as we have said reciprocally caused. And its material form appears. And this derives from the preceding in the half of each its side uniform cut.

XXXI. XXXII. The dodecahedron elevated solid or true vacuum has 90 lines and 180 superficial angles and of solid 12 elevated pentagonal pyramidal and has also 20 bases pure corporeal hexagonal. And has 60 surfaces all equilateral triangular and equiangular But of said 90 lines 12 are common to the 12 bases of the pentagonal pyramids. of the which the bases similarly convenes be pentagonal. And are the bases of the regular dodecahedron intrinsic that to its composition concurs which the intellect by only imagination comprehends and these 30 common lines only concur to the causation of the 12 solid angles depressed which as is said are hexagonal, that is that to their formation concur 6 lines. And forms itself said body from the regular dodecahedron intrinsic predicted and from 12 laterated pentagonal pyramids equilateral and equiangular and of equal height. And their bases are the same bases of the intrinsic ut supra.

XXXIII. XXXIV. The dodecahedron abscinded elevated solid or true vacuum has sides or true lines number 180 of the which 60 are elevated to the causation of the pentagonal pyramids 60 are elevated to the constitution of the triangular pyramids the other 60 are base sides each of said pyramids that is of the pentagonal and of triangular. And this so made body is composed of the dodecahedron cut plane intrinsic by only imagination to the intellect offered. And of 32 pyramids. Of which 12 are pentagonal, of height among them equal. And the other 20 are triangular pure of height among them equal. And the bases of these pyramids are the surfaces of the said truncated dodecahedron referring each to its that is the trigonal to the triangular pyramids and the pentagonal to the pentagonal pyramids. And falling in plane this always stops itself in 6 points or true pyramidal cones: Of which cones one will be of pentagonal pyramid and the other 5 are of the triangular pyramids. The which thing in air suspended appears to the eye absurd that similar bridges be to a point. And this such exalted Duke is of very great abstraction and of profound science that who understands knows unless he leaves me to lie. And to its dimension one arrives with very subtle practice especially of algebra and almucabala to rare noted and by us in our work well demonstrated convenes most easily to be able to apprehend it. And similarly that of the cut icosahedron in which hexagons and pentagons interpose themselves that all the measures to know make.
