Cap. LIII.

(Of the body of 26 bases and its origin plane solid or true vacuum and of the elevated solid or true vacuum.)

XXXV. XXXVI. Another body exalted Duke from the already said enough dissimilar is found called of 26 bases. From principle and origin most lightly derived. Of which 18 are square equilateral and rectangular and 8 are triangular equilateral similarly and equiangular. And this such has 48 sides or true lines and has 96 superficial angles of which 72 are all right. And are those of its 8 [18] square bases and 24 are acute. And are those of its 8 equilateral triangles. And these 96 among them concur to the composition in it of 24 solid angles. Of which each consists of one superficial angle of the triangle and of 3 right angles of 3 squares, And of its 48 lines 24 are common to the trigons and to the squares because of those 18 squares together according to the due opportunity added of necessity result those 8 triangles formed just as that of the other abscinded above is said. And the origin of this will be from the hexahedron uniform according to every its parts cut as similarly to the eye its material form to us shows. And will be its science in many considerations very useful to who well knows how to accommodate it specially in architecture and this has notice of its solid plane and vacuum.

XXXVII. XXXVIII. The 26 bases solid or true vacuum elevated receives in itself to its formation 144 lines the which among them according to the opportune exigency applied in it cause 288 superficial angles. And 26 solid elevated pyramidal. Of which 18 are contained by 4 acute superficial angles that is each of them. And 8 are contained by 3 acute. And will be composed said body of 26 laterated pyramids. Of which 18 are quadrangular and 8 triangular which all from outside around can, by the eye be discerned. And of the preceding 26 bases solid plane intrinsic by imagination only comprehended. And its 26 bases are likewise bases of the predicted 26 pyramids that is. The 18 quadrangular of the 18 laterated quadrangular pyramids and the 8 triangular of the 8 triangular pyramids. And in whatever mode this throws itself in plane space always on 3 points or true pyramidal cones stops itself which the experience of its material also to the eye will satisfy.
