Cap. LIV.

(Of the body of 72 bases plane solid and vacuum.)

XXXIX. XL. Among these condecently Exalted Duke be to place the body called of the 72 bases. Of which our Megarian philosopher in the 14. of his 12 fully describes. This although it has its bases plane laterated angular and difform is not to say that from any of the regulars it has dependence nor derivation but only forms and creates itself according to what in said place our philosopher demonstrates by means of the dodecagonal figure that is of 12 equal sides. And of its bases predicted 48 are quadrangular inequilateral and inequiangular. And only have the two opposite sides protracted towards the one and the other pole or we want to say cone and those among them equal. And the other its 24 bases are triangular inequilateral similarly. And of these 12 of them stand around. The one of the cones and 12 of the other. And each of them has two equal sides that is those that tend to the point of the pole interior and superior. Of this also one could always form its elevated as in the others were made but for the deformity of its bases will be difficult its science howsoever to the eye it renders not mediocre beauty, And would be caused in it 72 pyramids according to the number of its 72 bases of which pyramids the bases would be the same of that. And it inside imagined the form of which elevated I did not care among these materially to deduce to leave his part also to the reader of whose wit I do not distrust myself. And this 72 bases much by the architects will be frequented in their dispositions of edifices for being form enough accommodated especially where occurs to make tribunes or other vaults or we want to say heavens [ceilings]. And although that not always exactly are taken in said edifices so many faces yet to that similitude they rule squaring it quartering it in all modes according to the place and site where such edifice they intend to place. To whose convenience very many in diverse parts are found disposed and fabricated. As of the inestimable ancient temple Pantheon. And today by Christians in the head of the world. The Rotunda called be manifest. The which with so much solert [skilled] industry and of proportions observance [was] disposed that the light of a single eyelet in its fastigium open relief all renders it splendid and luminous. I leave of many other famous and illustrious cities as Florence Venice Padua Naples and Bologna. In the which enough edifices yes sacred as profane either small or large that they be to the mirror of this are made. Also here in his Milan in the worthy shrine of San Scetro the ornate chapel be a part of this split and with reservation of somewhat convex to the wall applied and in each its base joined there a rosette that adorned renders it. And in the devout and most sacred your temple of the Graces its tribune at the first altar and laterals already not if not a part similar of this pure in its bases to more beauty joined there those. And although many fabricate and draw the forms to their arbiter not having more of Vitruvius than of other architect notice not less the art use although they not know it just as of the rough rustics says Aristotle that soligezant et nesciunt se solegizare [make syllogisms and know not they make syllogisms]. So these such vtuntur arte et nesciunt se vti [use art and know not they use]. Also the tailor and shoemaker use geometry and know not what thing it be. And yes masons carpenters smiths and every artificer use the measure and the proportion and know not. Because as other times is said all consists in the number weight and measure. But what will we say of the modern edifices in their genus. Ordered and disposed with various and diverse models which to the eye because somewhat they render beauty for their being small and then in the fabrics do not rule the weight. And not that to a thousand years they arrive [but] before the third they ruin. And for their ill being intended in remaking more than in forming make spend. Calling themselves architects and never they saw the covers in that of the most excellent volume of our most worthy architect and great mathematician Vitruvius who composed of architecture with supreme documents to every structure and who from that deviates knows in water and founds in sand sooner ruins the art than architects named and know not the difference from the point to the line how will they know that of the angles without which is not possible well to edify which manifests (as says the prefaced Vitruvius) the great jubilance and summa letitia that had Pythagoras when with certain science had found the true proportion of the two straight lines that contain the right angle, of the square for which thing to the gods making great sacrifice and feast immolated one hundred oxen and this angle is of so much excellence that never can vary and for other names the perfect geometricians call it Angulum iustitie [Angle of justice] because without its notice is not possible to know good from evil in any our operation nor ever without it can one give measure certain by any mode. Wherefore the modern cobblers in their edifices to them seems to do nothing if outside of the right and due ancient norm not interpose any inconvenience of their foolishness blaming those (that yet some are found) who go it reducing to the true and ancient mode. And are those who delight themselves of our mathematical disciplines imitating the true guide of all edifices in the works of the predicted Vitruvius from which deviating is seen how stand our edifices yes divine as profane who is tortuous and who is twisted. And therefore most convenient will be the motto and its effect of your celsitude of the axe that all the tortuosity taps and continuing the already incepted his Milan not to less beauty than be Florence in brief will reduce from its abominable and inept impression removing their authors. Because in truth better that sleeping than they with a thousand eyes watching those understands as the similar demonstrates his close affine Illustrious Duke of Urbino in the admirable fabric of his worthy pre-alleged palace. And this with supportation [tolerance] of those who ill have that which until here to their document is said and to the said body be to the purpose sufficient.
