Cap. LV.

(Of the mode to know beyond the said more to form and how their forms in infinite proceed.)

Does not seem to me exalted Duke in said bodies more to extend myself considering that their process tends in infinite by the continuous and successive abscission of hand in hand of their solid angles and according to that their various forms come to multiply. And these given being the way by the already said open will be able to follow [them] because always will be said quod facile est inventis addere [that easy is to inventions add]. Is not difficult to add to the things found and therefore more or less lifting and joining to the predicted will be easy to every purpose. And this only we have until now followed to show how from those 5 regulars the virtue always in the others dependent distills itself to similitude of the 5 simple that to the formation of every created compound concur. For the which thing (as above was hinted) Plato was constrained the pre-tasted 5 regular forms to the 5 simple bodies to attribute that is to the earth air water fire and heaven as diffusely appears in his Timaeus where of the nature of the universe [he] treats. And to the element of the earth attributed the cubic form that is that of the hexahedron since that to the motion no figure has need of greater violence. And among all the elements which is found more fixed constant and firm than the earth. And that of the tetrahedron gave to the element of the fire because flying upwards causes the pyramidal form that the similar our fire to the eye makes it open because we see that to the plane and in low large and uniform always upwards degrade in mode that its flame the top in a point terminates just as on the cone of every pyramid the form of the octahedron attributed to the air. Because just as the air to a small movement is quiet the fire so the pyramidal form follows for the ability to the motion the form of the Pyramid. And the figure of the 20 bases that is of the icosahedron deputed to the water. Because since that she be surrounded by more bases than any of the others: to him seemed that it convened in the sphere sooner to the motion of the thing that spreading descends: than of that which ascends. And the form of the 12 pentagonal bases attributed to the heaven just as to that which is receptacle of all things, this dodecahedron the similar be receptacle and albergo [shelter/inn] of all the others 4 regular bodies as appears in their inscriptions one in the other. And also as says Alcinous above the Timaeus of Plato, because just as in the heaven are 12 signs in his zodiac and each of those in 30 equal parts divides itself that all its annual revolution be 360. So this dodecahedron has in itself 12 pentagonal bases of the which each in 5 triangles resolved stopping the point in middle and each of said triangles in 6 scalenes: that in all bases are 30 triangular for one: that among all are 360 as said zodiac. And these such forms by Chalcidius most celebrated philosopher expounding the said Timaeus much are commended. And so by Macrobius. Apuleius and very many others: because in truth are of every commendation worthy, for the reasons that in their fabrics are adduced showing the sufficiency of said 5 forms just as the number of said simple cannot in nature increase, so these 5 regular is not possible to assign more that of bases and of sides and of angles be equal: and that in sphere placed touching an angle all touch. Because if in nature one could a sixth simple body assign the supreme artificer would come to have been in his things diminished and without prudence to judge him, not having at beginning all the need opportune to it known. And for this certainly and not for other moved I comprehend Plato these such as is said to each of the said simple attributed so arguing: that is as very best geometrician and most profound mathematician. seeing the 5 various forms of these not to be able by any mode any other that to the spherical tends of sides bases and angles as is said equal imagine nor form as in the penultimate of the 13. is shown and by us to the opportune is adduced not unmeritedly argued the said to advene to the 5 simple. And from those every other form depend. And although that these 5 be only called regular not therefore excludes itself the sphere that be not above all most regular: and every other from that to derive as from the cause of the causes most sublime: and in her is not variety any but uniformity through all and in every place has its principle and end and right and left. Whose form whence it is caused here following placing end to said dependents we will say: and successively of all the other oblong bodies: that is that more long than wide are.
