Cap. LVII.

(How in the sphere are placed all the 5 regular bodies.)

And in this sphere exalted Duke are imagined all the 5 regular bodies in this mode, first of the tetrahedron if above its surface that is its skin or true vest is signed or true imagine 4 points equidistant for every verso the one from the other. and those by 6 straight lines be joined which of necessity will pass inside the sphere will be formed exactly the body predicted in it. And who should draw the cut by imagination with a plane surface for every verso according to said straight lines protracted would remain naked exactly said tetrahedron. As (so that for this the others better be apprized) if the said sphere were a stone of bombard [cannonball] and above it were said 4 points with equidistance signed if a lapicide [stonecutter] or chiselman with his irons should stamp it or true deface it leaving the said 4 points at dint of all said stone would have made the tetrahedron. Similarly if in said spherical surface be signed 8 points equidistant among them the one from the other and the other from the one. And those with 12 straight lines be joined will be by imagination in said sphere placed the second regular body called hexahedron or true cube, that is the figure of the diabolical instrument called die or taxillo. The which points similarly signed in a stone of bombard in mode said. And those continued by a lapicide in mode as above will have reduced said ball to cubic form. And if in said surface be noted 6 points pure according to every their equidistance as is said who those will continue or you want to say join with 12 straight lines will be exactly in said sphere made the third regular body called octahedron, That the similar made on a said stone the lapicide of a ball will have made the body of 8 triangular bases. And so if be signed 12 points those continued by 30 straight lines will have similarly in said sphere the fourth body called icosahedron placed, the similar the lapicide will have reduced the stone to the body of 20 triangular bases. And if 20 points be noted in mode said continuing them pure with 30 straight lines will be formed in said sphere. The fifth and most noble regular body called dodecahedron that is body of 12 pentagonal bases. And so the lapicide of said ball would have made the same form. Wherefore with similar imagination all will be in the sphere placed in mode that their angular points will be in the spherical surface situated and touching one of their angles in the sphere suddenly all touch, and is not possible by any mode that one touch without the other. when said body in sphere be placed. And by this infallible science will be able Your celsitude at times (as we have used) with said lapicides to have solace in this mode arguing their ignorance. Ordering them that of these similar stones of them they make some form of sides faces and angles equal, and that none be similar to the 5 of the regulars. verbi gratia obliging them to make a capital or base or cimasa to some column that be of four or of six equal faces in mode said and that that of the 4 be not triangular or true those of the 6 be not square. And so of 8 and 20 faces and none be triangular or true of 12 and none be pentagonal, the which things all are impossible. But they as temerarious boasters will say to make Rome and take maria and mountains that many of them are found who know not nor care to learn, against the moral document that says. Ne pudeat qua nescieris te velle doceri. [Be not ashamed of what thou knowest not to wish to be taught.] The similar that carpenter asked what he would do not finding plane, replied to make of it with another. And the other joiner said his square to be too large to adjust a small one presupposing the right angles among them to vary. And he who placed the two equal rods in form of tau. that is thus T. in front of his eyes, now one now the other longer judged. And others enough similar blockheads [capassonii]. As of these such at the time of the fabric of the palace of the good memory of the count Girolamo in Rome in his presence confabulating as happens discoursing the fabric being there many worthy in his retinue of diverse faculties among the others at that time nominated painter Melozzo da Forli to give pleasure to the speculation c. exhorted Melozzo and I the count that he should make make a certain capital in one of these forms not clarifying we to the Count the difficulty but only that would be worthy thing. And to this assenting the Count called to himself the master and said to him if he knew how to make it, that one replied this to be small affair and that he had made of them more times. Of which the Count doubted not to be worthy thing as we commended. We pure affirming the same adding to it openly that not would he do it for the impossibility above adduced. And recalling to himself said lapicide (that at that time also were denominated) asked him again if he would make it. Then almost scoffing smiled briefly to the yes and to the no always be ready the engage. The Count said to him if thou doest it not what wantest thou lose? And that one alert replied not ill Lord that so much more than Your illustrious Lordship equals of that which I can gain and remained content assigned to him term 20 days and he asking four. Happened that wasted many marbles and made one or more abacus, finally the Count did not oblige him if not to the damage of the stones and remained scorned. But did not cease yet that wanted to know the origin of the proposal. And knew to be the friar in mode that not little rancor after he bore me and finding me said to me messer messer I do not pardon you, of the injury done if you teach me not the mode to make it and I to him offered myself as much as I was worth and for more days staying in Rome to him was not villain. and opened to him of these and of other things to him pertinent. And that courteous one wanted that a worthy cape in his name of me should carry. So I say that at times similar to Your celsitude are occasion to make aware others of their error and not with so many boastings to come to their aspect almost every other despising. So already did Hiero with Simonides poet, as recites Cicero in that de natura deorum. The which Simonides temerariously obliged himself in term of one day space to know to him to say exactly what thing was god and said not to be that difficulty that others say to know it. To whom Hiero finished the said term asked if he had found it that one said yet is not [found] that he should concede him somewhat more space. After the which similarly to him happened and briefly more terms interposed, that one confessed less to understand of it than before and remained confused with his temerity. And this as to the sphere to their location.
