Cap. LVIII.

(Of the oblong bodies that is more long or true high than wide.)

Follows exalted Duke to full notice of this our tractate to have some thing to say to their notice of the oblong bodies that is of those that are more long or true high than wide. Just as are columns and their pyramids. Of which more sorts of the ones and the others are found. And therefore first we will say of the columns and their origin, afterwards of their pyramids. The columns are of two kinds that is round and laterated. just as the plane figures others are curvilinear. and are those that by curved or true twisted lines are contained. And others are called rectilinear. and are those that by straight lines are contained. The round column is a body contained between two equal circular bases and are among them equidistant which by our philosopher in the eleventh so is defined that is the round corporeal figure, of which the bases are two plane circles in the extremity and crassitude that is height equal be the vestige of the rectangular parallelogram stopped the side that contains the right angle. And the said surface circumducted until as much that it return to its place. And calls itself this figure round column. Wherefore of the round column and of the sphere and of the circle be a same center. Verbi gratia. Be the parallelogram abcd, that is quadrangular surface of sides equidistant and of right angles. And stop itself the side ab. the which so stopped all the parallelogram be led around until as much that it return to its place whence it commenced to move the figure then corporeal by the motion of this parallelogram described calls itself round column, of the which the bases are two circles and the center be the point b. and the other is that which makes the line da. in its motion or true turning, and its center be the point a. and the axis of this column is said the line ab. which stands firm in the movement of the parallelogram. And if we should imagine the parallelogram abcd. when it arrives with its turning to the site abef. so joins to the site whence it commenced to move according to the continuation of the plane surface: that is that all be a parallelogram. dcef. and that we have led in it the diameter. de. the which diameter also de. will be diameter of the column. That which one says of the column and of the sphere and of the circle to be a same center: must be understood when of these be a same diameter: verbi gratia: we have said that de. be diameter of this column. Then the sphere and the circle of which the diameter is the line de. be necessary that they have a same center with the center of the proposed column. Be then that the line de. divide the line ab. in the point g. and will be g. center of the column. Because [it] divides the axis of the column by equals and also the diameter of the column by equals which is proved by the 26. of the first, because the angles that are at g. are equal by the 15. of the first. And the angles that are at a. and at b. are right by the hypothesis. And the line ad. be also equal to the line bc. Wherefore dg. be equal to the eg. And so ag equal to the gb. And since that the angles e. and f. are right if above to the point g. according to the space dge. also above the line de. be made a circle it will pass by the converse of the first part of the thirtieth of the third by the points e. and f. Wherefore the point g. will be center of the circle of the which the diameter is diameter of the column. And therefore also is of the sphere. And by this is manifest that to every rectangular parallelogram the circle: and to every column the sphere can be circumscribed. And so be clear that which has wanted to propose to us this theorem of our philosopher in said definition of the round column Of which until here be sufficient and following we will say of the laterated as was promised.
