Cap. LXI.

(Of the pentagonal laterated columns.)

XLIX. L. In the third place are the pentagonal laterated columns that is those of 5 faces as here the figure A. B. that each be tetragonal or true quadrilateral. And the bases of these similar columns always are two pentagons that is two rectilinear figures of 5 sides or true angles. Because in all the rectilinear figures the number of the angles equals itself to the number of its sides, and otherwise cannot stand. And these also have to be equilateral and inequilateral according as their bases will permit: just as a little before of the quadrilateral laterated was said. Since that some pentagons are equilateral and equiangular. and others inequilateral and by consequence inequiangular. But every pentagon that has 3 angles among them equal if it will be equilateral of necessity will be also equiangular. as demonstrates the seventh of the 13. This is said because the pentagon could have equal sides with two angles among them equal, not therefore would be all equiangular. And these two pentagons that is superior and inferior pure similarly with the equidistance of their height in said column have to be understood. Either be the columns equilateral or inequilateral as one wants. And because exalted Duke the species of the laterated columns can in infinite increase according to the variety of the rectilinear figures of more and less sides. Because of every laterated column convene its two bases, that is supreme and inferior of necessity to be two similar rectilinear figures, that is that convene in the number of sides [so that] were not one triangular and the other tetragonal, and also equilateral and equiangular among them to the uniformity of the columns howsoever diversely make variety in them stopping them at times equilateral and at times inequilateral. For the which thing does not seem to me in said [columns] more beyond to extend myself but only induce to memory that their denomination always derives from the bases, that is according as will be the bases so are called, verbi gratia. if the bases are triangular as was above in the seratile body they will be called triangular. And if they will be tetragonal or true quadrilateral will be called quadrangular. And if pentagonal pentagonal. And if of 6 sides will be called hexagonal et sic de singulis. But be the bases of what quality one wants always the faces from each will be rectangular tetragonal. And of the one and of the other until here their material forms to the eye demonstrate that [which] is said at the number for their table placed. And also in this below in plane figure in perspective at the same number as will be able your celsitude to see.
