Cap. LXII.

(Of the mode to measure all sorts of columns and first of the round.)

Conveniently by now the mode to know to measure all sorts of columns seems to me be placed, although fully of this in our great work we have treated. yet succinctly here by a nod to your celsitude I will induce it and first of all the round for the which this be general rule. First be measured one of its bases reducing it to square according to the mode proximal by the noble Geometer Archimedes found [and] placed in his volume sub rubrica de quadratura circuli, and in our great work adduced with his demonstration that is thus. Find the diameter of the base, and that be multiplied in itself. of the product be taken the 11/14 that is the eleven fourteenths or true quatordecimi. and those multiplied by the height of the column this last product will be the corporeal mass of all the column, verbi gratia so that better it be apprised. Be the round column abcd. whose height ac. or true bd. be 10. And the diameters of the bases the one ab. and the other cd. each 7. I say that to square this and every other similar be taken one of said diameters which it be ab. or true cd. that does not make case being equal, that is 7. and this 7. must be multiplied in itself will make 49. and of this I say be taken the 11/14 which are 38 1/2. And these I say be multiplied against the height or true length of all the column, that is against bd. or true ac. let us put 10. will make 385, and so much we will say all the capacity or true corporal air of all said column. And you want to say this case exalted Duke that if those numbers import braccia of what sort one wants in it will be 385 cubic small squares, that is as dice for every verso one braccio: that is long one braccio wide one braccio, and high one braccio: as the figure here lateral demonstrates. And so if said numbers import feet so many as of the braccia is said, and if pace pace and palms palms et sic de singulis. And resolving said column into cubes would be made of it 385. And this suffices to the intent present. Not less to the quadrature and dimension of said circular bases many other modes are given, which all in one return, which by order in said ours we have adduced. The why be taken the 11/14 that is of the 14 parts of the multiplication of the diameter in itself in every circle is done. because it is found with much approximation by Archimedes that the circle in comparison of the square of its diameter be as from 11 to 14. That is if the square of the diameter were 14 the circle would be 11. although not yet by any sage with precision but little varies: as here to the eye in the figure appears that the circle be less than said square as much as are the angles of said square that the circle of its space takes the which angles of all the square are the 3/14 that is of the 14 parts the 3. And the 11. come to be comprised by the circular space. as appears in the square abcd. that its sides equal themselves to the diameter of the circle that is to the line ef. which through middle divides it passing through the point g. called center of the said circle as in the beginning of his first narrates the philosopher our. And this of the round.
