Cap. LXIV.

(Of the pyramids and all their differences.)

Follows in order exalted Duke to have to say of the pyramids and their diversity. And first of those that are called round pyramids and then successively of the others all. And to full notice we will say with our philosopher in his 11. the round Pyramid to be a solid figure and be the vestige of a rectangular triangle stopped one of its sides that contain the right angle circumducted until as much that it return to the place Whence it commenced to move and if the fixed side will be equal to the circumducted side will be the figure rectangular. and if it will be longer will be acute-angled. and if it will be shorter will be obtuse-angled. And the axis of said figure is the fixed or true firm side, and its base will be a circle. And calls itself this, pyramid of the round column.

Verbi gratia so that the said better be apprised. Be the triangle abc. of which the angle b. be right and be the side which stops itself ab. the which stopped turn around said triangle until as much that it return to the place whence it commenced to move. That such figure then corporeal which will be described or true formed by the movement of this triangle is called round pyramid. Of which are 3 differences or true species. Because other is rectangular, other acute-angled. the third obtuse-angled. And the first forms itself when the side ab. were equal to the side bc. And be that the line bc. when with the turning of the triangle it arrives to the site of the line bd. in mode that the point c. fall above the point d. and become a same line. And this is understood that she then joins herself to the site from which she commenced to move according to the rectitude. And will be this line almost the line bcd. And because by the 32. of the first and by the 5. of the said the angle cab. will be half of right, will be the angle cad. right and therefore this such pyramid will be called rectangular pyramid. but if the side ab. be longer than the side bc. will be acute-angled. because then by the 32. of the first and by the 19. of the said will be the angle cad. less than the half of the right. And therefore all the angle cad. will be less than right and acute. Wherefore said pyramid will be acute-angled and if the side ab. will be less than the side bc. will be the angle cab. greater than the half of right by the 32 of the first and by the 19 of the said. and all cad. which will be double to it cab. greater than right and obtuse. Then the pyramid then conveniently will be called obtuse-angled. And the axis of this pyramid will be called line ab. and its base the circle described by the line bc, so circumducted above the center b. And will be called this pyramid of the round column, that is of that which would make the parallelogram that was born of the two lines ab. and bc. standing fixed the side as ab. above of the round column was said. and this of the round pyramid and its differences to the purpose satisfy. And of the others be said.
