Cap. LXV.

(Of the laterated pyramids and their diversities.)

XLIII. XLIV. The laterated pyramids exalted Duke are of infinite sorts just as the variety of their columns whence they have origin as after we will conclude. But first of our philosopher we place his declaration in his 11. placed. Where he says the laterated pyramid to be a corporeal figure contained by surfaces the which from one outside are elevated upwards to a opposite point, And because is to note that in every laterated pyramid all the surfaces that surround it except its base lift themselves to a point the which will be called cone of the pyramid, and all these such lateral surfaces are triangular. and at the most of the times their base is not triangular, as here in line appears, the pyramid A. triangular of the which the cone B and the pyramid D quadrilateral its cone E. and the pyramid pentagonal. F. its cone G. and so following in all and better in its own material form to the numbers LI. LII. LIII. LIV. LV. of solid and vacuum and above in this in plane by perspective to the same numbers and the derivation of these such and of the laterated columns. of the which above we said and they are born in this mode, that is stopping a point actually in one of the bases of the laterated column or true imagining it. and that joining by straight lines with each of the rectilinear angles of the other base of said column opposite. then exactly will be formed the pyramid of said column of as many triangular surfaces contained as that in the base of said column will be lines or true sides and will be the column and its pyramid by same numbers denominated. that is if such laterated column will be trilateral or true triangular. The pyramid also will be called trigonal or true triangular, and if said column be quadrilateral and its pyramid will be called quadrilateral, and if pentagonal pentagonal et sic de reliquis. The which manifests itself as before of said laterated columns was said their species in infinite to be able to multiply after the diversity and variation of their rectilinear bases so we say to have to happen of their laterated pyramids. since that to every column or true cylinder responds its pyramid either be round or be laterated. And that point so in its base stopped not necessitates that of point be in the middle of said base situated provided that from that it exit not imports not, because with said lines protracted pure pyramid is caused, although that those drawn exactly to the mid point be called Pyramid right at level. and the others be called declining or true leaning. Are some others called curved pyramids or true truncated, and are those that do not arrive of point to the cone, but to them is missing the top and are called cut or true tagliate and of so many sorts are these similar as their integral [ones] and so of names either round or laterated. as here in line appears the round truncated. A. the short triangular B. the cut quadrangular C. And this seems to me be to their notice sufficient. And following after we will say of their odd [ligiadra?] measure.
