Cap. LXVI.

(Of the mode and way to know to measure every pyramid.)

The quantity and measure just and precise. Exalted Duke, of each pyramid integral either be round or laterated one will have from the quantity of their columns in this mode. First we will find the area or true space of the base of the pyramid which we intend to measure by way of the rules given above in finding the corporal mass of all the columns yes round and laterated. And that found we will multiply in the axis that is height of said pyramid. And that which it will make will be the capacity of all its column. And of this last multiplication always we will take the 1/3 that is its third part, and that much exactly will be the corporal quantity of the said pyramid and never fails, verbi gratia. be the round pyramid abc. of the which the base be the circle bc. whose diameter is 7 its axis ad. which be 10. I say that first be squared the base as above in the round column was done. because as is said of the columns and of the pyramids be the same bases and the same heights. We will have for the surface of the base 38 1/2 which multiplied by the axis ad. that is by 10. will make 385 for the capacity of all its column. Now of this I say that be taken the 1/3 comes 128 1/3. And this will be the quantity of said pyramid. The why is to note for the accuracy adduced that in the round [ones] to number convene to respond according to the proportion until now found between the diameter and the circumference. And by that above said between 11 and 14. The which as in that place was said are not with precision but little varies by Archimedes found. But remains not that which said we have that the round pyramid in quantity be not exactly the 1/3 of its round column. Although exactly also for the ignorance of the quadrature of the circle by number one cannot with precision express. but its 1/3 is. And said column will be its triple, that is 3 much of its pyramid. as is proved by the 7. of the 12. But the other all laterated by number exactly can be assigned for being their bases rectilinear. And so as of the round is done the similar of all laterated must be observed after that so of these in the 8. of the 12. is proved that they are triple that is 3 much of their pyramid. And this to their sufficient dimension be said.
