Cap. LXVII.

(How of the laterated open is shown each to be subtriple to its column.)

In the 6. of the 12. exalted Duke our philosopher concludes the seratile body which is the first species of the laterated columns. as above was said that to be divisible in three equal pyramids of the which the bases each be triangular. And by consequence the said body be triple to each of those. And with this evidence is shown every pyramid to be subtriple to its cylinder or true column. And from here is born the rule above given that of the quantity of all the column be taken the 1/3 the which thing in the rectilinear columns clear appears, because all those are resoluble in as many seratile bodies in as many triangles can their bases be distinguished, and of so many always those such are said to be composed as in the 8 of the 12 will be proved. Wherefore the quadrilateral column, of the which the base for being quadrilateral, resolves itself in two triangles protracting in that the diagonal line. that is from one angle opposite to the other. And above these such triangles are imagined and also actually are made two seratile bodies. And because everyone be triple to its pyramid follows both those to be triple to both their pyramids. But both the seratile are all the quadrilateral column, then the two pyramids of the two seratile are the 1/3 of all said column. And these two pyramids are one total exactly of all the column, for being those the two equal and integral parts of said column. So that the rule given cannot fail for all the reasons adduced. And similarly the same effect manifests itself in every other laterated column as also of the 3. their species called pentagonal of the which the base be resoluble in 3. triangles, and by that is said all the column in 3 seratile bodies. of the which everyone is triple to its pyramid. and for this all 3 are triple to all 3. their pyramids. and these together we want to say one of all the column, just as their 3 seratile remake all the column. And so the same in all the others discoursing. And the said resolution of bases in triangles in the 32. of the first is shown. Where is concluded every polygonal figure that is of more angles and sides to be always resoluble in as many triangles as are its angles or true sides minus two. verbi gratia. the quadrilateral has 4 angles and by consequence 4 sides, she will be resoluble in two triangles at least that is at the least its resolution which appears if in that be drawn a straight line from one of its opposite angles to the other. as here in the figure is seen of the tetragon abcd. which be divided in the two triangles abd. and bcd. by the line bd. which in the art be called diagonal and also diameter. And so the pentagonal resolves itself at least in 3 triangles, that is by general rule in two triangles less than are not its angles or true sides the which thing will appear if from one (which be) of its angles to the two others opposite be led two straight lines. As here in the figure abcde. pentagonal described will be done. In the which from its angle a to the two opposite c. and d protracted the lines will be resolved in the 3 triangles abc. acd. and ade. And each of said lines in the art calls itself chord of the pentagonal angle. And so the hexagonal resolve themselves in 4 triangles et sic in reliquis. So that much exalted Duke we are obliged to the ancients who with their vigils our minds have elucidated especially to our Megarian Euclid who together ordinately gathered of the past [mathematicians] and of his added in these most excellent disciplines and sciences mathematical with so many diligent his demonstrations. as appears in all his sublime volume. Whose wit not human but divine shows itself. Especially in his tenth in the which truly so much he extolled it as much as to the human be permitted and I know not to comprehend what more highly could have been able to say of those lines most abstract irrational whose science is most profound above every other to the judgment of who more of it knows. And of the integral pyramids as to the purpose aspects here be end.
