Cap. LXIX.

(Of the measure of all the other regular bodies and dependent.)

Follows to have to say of the dimension of the regular bodies and of their dependent. Wherefore of said regular I do not care otherwise here to extend myself for having of it already composed particular tractate to the most illustrious affine of your Ducal celsitude Guido Ubaldo Duke of Urbino in our work to His Lordship dedicated. and to the reader easy to that will be the recourse for being to the common utility arrived as before was said. And in this your inclita [famous] city enough of them are found. Whose measure so much is more speculative as much more than the other bodies are those more excellent and perfect. Matter certainly of cothurnus [tragedy/high style] and not of fool. And in that place to sufficiency of it was said. But the mode of the others from those dependent will be similar to that which of the short pyramids is given, that is that needs to reduce them to their total perfects. and those by our rules given at the place said with diligence measure them. and that quantity save and then the supplement made to its integral apart by the rules of the pyramids also measure. And that which makes subtract from the quantity of all its regular the remainder will be exactly the quantity of said dependent, when said dependent were of the number of abscinded. As the abscinded tetrahedron to which is missing the points respect to its integral, the which come to be all small pyramids equal and uniform, And therefore one measured suddenly by that the others all will be noted according to the number that to their sides or bases or others is placed after the which needs in the practice always to rule oneself. And those had from its integral as is said thou wilt subtract. But if said dependent were of the number of the elevated then to have its measure to its perfect will be added the quantity of all those its small pyramids. the which come of necessity to be as many as are the bases of its perfect. And so briefly more and less in said needs to guide oneself after the light of their perfects to those adding and minuting [subtracting] after the occurrences said. Otherwise wishing to rule oneself one would arrive in chaos inextricable. And therefore of them this be the document opportune not distrusting myself of the pilgrim wits and speculative intellects to these and to whatever other faculty prompt whom always in all our process we have presupposed. especially by excellence and antonomasia among all the others supreme of that of your Ducale celsitude. To the which in our discourse I intend not to have spoken as to ignorant nor of similar nor of others in any mode. Since that she indifferently of every one be prodita [produced/endowed?] and adorned, in the which wishing to extend myself not that the paper but the life would not be sufficient. Sed quod patet expresse non est probare necesse. [But what lies open expressly is not necessary to prove.] Since with her sole look heals and gladdens every sight turbid: and truly be as sun that warms and illuminates the one and the other pole. And what more of her can be said today among mortals? if not that she be sole quiet and refrigerium [refreshment], not that of Italy but of all the christianism. That splendid ample magnificent and magnanimous to everyone shows herself. In that is mercy in that is pleiad [sic?], in that magnificence in that gathers itself howsoever in creature of goodness yields Demosthenes with Cicero and Quintilian to her mouth bridge that expands of speaking so large river nectar to the good and to the guilty severe knife. That of every religion most observant. and of their temples not only restorer, but assiduous author. That always to the diurnal and nocturnal divine office to the all dedicated not with less reverence than in that professed to them do themselves with most sacred prelates that the most worthy her devout chapel to the divine cult deputed and of most worthy singers adorned with the other her peculiar devotions render it manifest. That to every supplicant especially pious without delay her piteous ears undoes, and her benignity to who asks not pure succors but more of the times freely to the asking runs. For the which things not unmeritedly he who never saw thing new singularly to our times among the others in all the universe of his graces made her partaker. Therefore not with less convenience than Octavian his temple in Rome of the universal peace made she her most sacred of graces to memory of so many in her inclita city of Milan has constructed, And that to the day in all modes to adorn it renders not herself satiated and to every its opportune indigence to subvene it. And this succinct discourse I pray reader that to adulation attributes it not. from the which yes by nature as by the profession I am in all alien. Because if other I did not less thou of envy and malice to his celsitude than I of adulation convinced would be not taking admiration of so many his excellencies and celestial gifts, sed quod oculis vidimus testamur [but what with eyes we saw we testify]. and not only to this but with all my most sacred seraphic religion with its precipuous and singular head and pastor most reverend our father M. Francesco Sansone from Brescia of that most worthy general in our general chapter of the year present here in his inclita city of Milan celebrated to the which very great number of most famous and most celebrated in sacred theology and other sciences doctors and bachelors of all the universe and of every nation que sub celo est [which under heaven is]. In the which assiduously every day cathedral and public disputations were made with the presence always of the immense humanity and devout to his servants condescension of his Ducal celsitude together with the most reverend Lordship of monsignor his brother-in-law Hipolyto tituli sancte Lucie in Salice deacon Cardinal Estense and much other of his most ornate magistrate retinue. I leave the uberty [fruitfulness] and the affluent abundance in every thing from the hands of His Ducal celsitude to the sustentation of so much multitude emanated the which not that to the then present but also to the posterity for many months was sufficient. For the whose health and happy state all the crowd minor to the highest its prayers joined hands expands. And particularly I unworthy and miserable sinner who continuously to your Ducal celsitude recommends himself.
