Cap. LXXI.

(Of that which is understood by these vocables among the mathematicians used that is hypothesis hypothumissa coraustus pyramidal cone pentagonal chord perpendicular catheto diameter parallelogram diagonal center arrow [sagitta].)

Are some vocables exalted Duke induced by the wise among the mathematical disciplines for intelligence of their parts so that in none one have to equivocate the which to who in it were not much expert would give annoyance, and above in this our compendium often inserted as you will have reading found. And for not deviating from the ancients we have observed them. Of the which not without utility seems to me here succinctly to the reader to give notice. And first of the hypothesis.

By the hypothesis must be understood the presupposition admitted and conceded between the parties author and adversary by means of which is understood to conclude, and denied follows not conclusion. And therefore is not accustomed to put it if it is not possible.

By the hypothumissa in all the rectilinear figures especially is understood the line that to the greater angle of those be opposite. But properly is accustomed to understand. The side opposite to the right angle in the rectangular or true orthogonal triangles that so are called in the art. Which of necessity always are the half of the square figure or true of the tetragon oblong that is rectangular figure of 4 sides more long than wide.

Corausto is understood a straight line which joins the extremities of the two in high elevated. And can the corausti be more and less according to the number of the lines elevated.

Cone of the pyramid means the supreme point of the top where the lines that part from its base concur.

Chord pentagonal or true pentagonale or we want to say of the pentagonal angle all is understood a line drawn straight in the pentagonal figure from one of its which one wants angle to the other to that opposite as more times was done.

The perpendicular means a straight line elevated or true situated above another at square that is that make one or more right angles around itself. And so also when she stood to the mode said situated on a plane surface. And commonly is accustomed to find it in the triangles for their measure as in said our work at its place we said.

Catheto imports the same that the perpendicular and by the vulgars grossly in the triangles be called communiter arrow of the triangle and comes from the greek vocable.

Diameter properly is understood in the circle a straight line that passes through its center and with its extremities touches the circumference of every part and divides the circle in two equal parts. But is accustomed also in the squares to say the diameter. And therefore for not equivocating is said diameter of circle and diameter of the square to difference of the one and of the other.

Parallelogram is understood a surface of equidistant sides, the which properly are quadrilateral that is those 4 species that above you had in the chapter 69. [sic, 60?] called square tetragon oblong rhombus and rhomboid and by other name elmuaym and similar to the elmuaym. And although every figure of even sides has opposite sides equidistant as the hexagon octagon. decagon. dodecagon and other similar, not less those 4 have particularly to be understood.

Diagonal mainly is understood a straight line drawn from one angle to the other opposite in the tetragon oblong that divides it in two equal parts ad rationem of the square. And also in the rhombus and rhomboid is used so to call it.

Center properly be called in the circle that mid point in the which stopping the immobile foot of the sextant [compass] the other turning the circle is described with the line called circumference or true periphery. And from that point all the lines to the said circumference led among them are equal. But is used also in the other rectilinear figures to say center the mid point of their surface, as in the triangles squares pentagons hexagons and other equilateral and also equiangular that from each of their angles to the said point the straight [lines] protracted all similarly among them will be equal.

Arrow [Saetta] be called that straight line that from the mid point of the arc of some portion of the circle moves and falls at square in the middle of its chord, and calls itself arrow respect to the part of the circumference that is called arc to similitude of the material bow [arco] that also uses said 3 names that is chord arc and arrow.

And although very many other vocables be used of the which fully in the great work ours we have treated. I care not here to adduce them but only these necessary to the intelligence of the present compendium to your celsitude seemed to me to adduce the which if with so much number of papers be not concluded, but not of less substance and highest speculations in it is treated. And truly Exalted Duke not lying to your celsitude I say the speculation of the mathematicians not to be able more high virtually to extend itself. although that at times greater and smaller happen the quantities. And in these our philosopher Megarian concluded and terminated all his volume of Arithmetic Geometry proportions and proportionality in XV. partial books distinct as to the intelligent will be clear. And therefore not little grace and dignity will increase to your prefaced most worthy library as before in our epistle we said, for being he unique and sole of such order by me composed, and to none until here (save to your celsitude) in all the universe known. And here in the inclita your magna city of Milan not with mediocre toils and long vigils under the shadow of that and of his as much son my unmeritedly peculiar and singular patron San Galeazzo Sforza Severino of Aragon to none in the military postponing. And of our disciplines sum lover, especially to the day of the assiduous his reading of those tasting subtlest and sweet fruit. And be for conclusion of our process the humil pardon and due reverence of the perpetual servant of your celsitude to the which infinitely in all modes recommends himself. Que iterum atque iterum ad vota felicissime valeat.

Finis at day 14. december in Milan in our almo convent MCCCCXCVII. Sitting sum pontiff Alexander VI. of his pontificate year VII.
