Cap. I.

Of the Measure and Proportions of the human Body, of the Head and its other Members, as Symbol of the Architecture.

Wir must consider, like Plato in his Timaeus says,
where he of the Nature of the Universe handles: God, when he the
Man formed, set the Head to him on the Top, like
the Citadels and Fortresses in the Cities, in order that it Watcher
of the whole physical Building, i.e. of all other lower
Members were. And that armed and provided he with all
necessary Conveniences, as illuminates, with seven Shoot-
slits, i.e. seven Hollows, through which the Understanding the
outer Objects to receive had, and this are the
two Ears, the two Eyes, the two Nostrils, the seventh
the Mouth. For, as the maxima philosophica says, nothing is
in the Spirit, without that it before not in the Senses was.
Therefore arc of the human Sensations five, namely Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling, Feeling and Tasting, and therefore stems the
literal Proverb, which says: "If the Head
aches, so suffer also the remaining Members" after Art of the
said Fortresses in the Cities, if they from the Enemies
with War-machines of the Artillery, Stone-throw-machines, Slings,
Catapults, Ballistae, Bombards, Field-guns, Guns, Hook-
rifles, Carbines, Field-snakes and other harmful Things
uncomforted and annoyed become. The whole City feels
about it Suffering at great Uncertainty for her Well-going.
Likewise happens it at the Man, that if he in the Head
annoyed or hindered, all remaining Members thereunder suffer.
And therefore ordered the Nature, the Servant of the Deity, as
she the Man formed, his Head with all necessary,
all other Parts of his Body corresponding Proportions
on. And out of this Reason directed the Ancients, after they
the appropriate Order of the human Body weighed,
all their Works, especially the holy Temples after his
Proportion. For in him found they the two main-est
Figures, without which it not possible, any Something to accom-
plish, namely the highest perfect Circle-line and of
all equal Circumference that of the largest Content, as Dionysius
in his Work of the Spheres says. The other is the equi-
lateral quadratic. And this are those, which from the two
Main-lines, namely curved and straight brought forth
become. Regarding the Circle-line reveals it itself, that if
a Man himself on the Back lying stretches out and so far
it possible the Legs and Arms well apart-places, the
Navel exactly the Center of his whole Positon is, such,
that if man a sufficiently long Thread has, and the
one Tip of him in the named Navel fastens and the
other rings in the Circle around-leads, man exactly find will,
that he likeway the highest Point of the Head and the
Tips of the Middle-fingers of the Hands and those of the big Toes
of the Feet touch, which the to the true Definition of the Circle
from our Euclid in the Beginning of his first Book set up
required Conditions are. Also the Square becomes ob-
tained, if equally the Arms and the Legs stretched out,
and from the out-most Ends of the big Toes of the Feet to
to the Tips of the Middle-fingers of the Hands the straight Lines
such drawn become, that from the Tip of the big Toe
of the one Foot to the other Tip of the other Foot just as
much be, like from the Tip of the Middle-fingers of the Hands to
named Tips of the big Toes of the Feet and exactly so
much also from the Tip of the said Middle-fingers of the Hands,
if man from the one to the other the Line draws, if the
Arms exactly straight stretched out; and just as much amounts to exactly
the Height or Length of the whole Man, if he well
formed, and not monstrous, which so always presupposed
becomes, like our Vitruo says. His noblest outer Member, name-
ly the Head, will itself, if man well thereupon pays attention, o-
ver the Form in the first Figure in the straight Lines, name-
ly the equilateral Triangle, Isopleuros called, find, which
as Foundation and Principle of all other following Books from
our Euclid to the first Place of his first Book pla-
ced, as he said: an equilateral Triangle over a
given straight Line to erect. This shows to you the
Eye in the here present Figur 1) clearly, if man the
Outlines of the whole said Head well considers, as you
the Triangle a m k from equal Sides formed, and over
its Side mk the elongated Tetragon km s b represented
see, that so wide is, like the Cathetus from a to the Basis
mk, which I, in order not the Nose with a Letter
to darken, free left have. And this Side m k, which
the whole Front-side of the said Head forms, is in three
equal Parts divided, namely in the Point l, and the End-
point of the Nostrils such, that m l just as large like
from l to to said Nostrils and from said Nostrils
to k, the Sole of the Chin, so that every Length the
third Part of mk makes. Therefore is from the lowest Part
of the Forehead, the Nose-in-bow l, at the Eyebrows to the
Hair-roots m, i.e. to the Summit of the Forehead a Third
of the said Side m k, so that his Forehead exactly the third
Part of the whole Head high is, likeway forms the
Nose the other Third, and from said Nostrils to
the Ground-plane of the Chin h or k is an other Third.
And this last Third divides itself still in three other equal
Parts, whereof the one from the Nostrils to the Mouth, the
other from the Mouth to the Chin-pit, the third from be-
said Pit to the Chin-sole k reaches, so that Each a
Ninth of the whole m k, i.e. the Third of a Third
amounts to, although the Chin sometimes from the Profile of the Face m k
deviates, as you in the named Figure drawn see,
whose Size to us not exactly known is, rather the excellent
Artists have that only from the Nature according to Favor
and Good-thinking of the Eye kept. And this is a Kind
of the irrational Proportions, which the Number after not
possible is to give. The Same becomes regarding the Dis-
tance from the Hair-root and the End of the Angle m
said, which likewise somewhat from that deviates as man sees,
since it otherwise to the Eye not graceful appear would. And
the Perpendicular from a or Cathetus is exactly on the Vaulting
of the Nose directed and cuts the Profile m k at the well
proportioned and correctly ordered and not monstrous
exactly in the Middle. And these until here at his Profile e-
numerated Parts are all rational and to us known. But
where the Irrationality of the Proportion enters, i.e. so that man
her on no Art through a Number give can, remain they to the
worthy Decision of the Perspectivist left over, who them
according to his Good-thinking to determine has. For the Art
imitates the Nature, so far it to her possible is, and if the
Artwork exactly that, what the Nature made, represented, so
would man it not Art, rather an other, the first
fully equal Nature call, which the same be would.
This say I, so that you you not wonder shall, if all
Things the Hands of the Creator not fully equal-come, because
it not possible is. And from there stems it, that the Wise
say, the mathematical Sciences and Disciplines be
abstract and it is never in the Reality possible, them at
them visible to represent. Therefore can the Hand never the
Point, the Line, Surface and every other Figure form. And
although we Point that Sign call, what man with the
Tip of the Quill or an other Pen makes, so is it yet
not that from him defined mathematical Point, like him
our Euclid in the first Words of his Elements explains,
as he says: "Point is, whose Part not is." And likewise
say we regarding all remaining mathematical Principles
and Figures, that man them from the Matter separated
understand must. And although we them Point, Line etc.
name, so do we it, because we no suitabler Words
have, their Concepts to express etc. And this suffice,
so far it itself on the proportional Division of the Profile
of the human Head refers, if thesame correctly for-
med, whilst I the Superfluous to the Favor of the Artist
leave over, like the Vaulting of the Eyebrows and the Nose-
tip. Although man from the Nostrils to to said
Tip usually a Ninth of the Profile gives, so can
man it yet not exactly from us known Relations
determine, as above regarding the Chin said became.
Therefore etc.

1) Cfr. the regarding Figure at the End of the Tractate.
