To his dearest Pupils and Disciples Cäsar dal Saxo,
Gera del cera, Rainer Francesco de pippo, Bernardio and Mar-
silio da monte and Hieronvmo de Jecciarino and Associates of
Borgo S. Sepulchro, worthy Stonemasons and most diligent Pur-
suers of the Sculpture- and architectural Subject, Fra Luca
Paciuolo your Countryman of the Order of the Minorites and Pro-
fessor of the holy Theology. So God will.

Since I from you several times asked, to you besides the prac-
tical Application of the Arithmetic and Geometry, which I to you
at the same time given, with those to you also some Rules and
Methods give to want, in order the from you desired
Success in the Architecture to obtain, so can I not avoid
(although very occupied to the common Use of the Pre-
sent and Future with the Completing of our mathe-
matical Works and Disciplines, whose Printing I with all
Diligence drive), even if not in the Whole, yet part-
ly your humane Request to suffice, especially in Reference to
that, which to your Purpose know to learn necessary is.
Therefore understand I without Doubt (since you yourself always in the
other recommendable Parts with all Zeal exercising,
pleased have), that you consequently to this with still more burning
Longing inclined are. Therefore have I myself, with Turn-
ing-away every other Undertaking completely in Readiness pla-
ced, you (as said), at least to the Part therein suffice
to want, not with the Intention presently over such Art
or much more Science completely to treat, whilst I
me with Help of the Highest for suitabler Times and Leisure
reserve, what such Disciplines concerns, since they Stuffs of the
Cothurnus and not of the Fool are, so that I you ask,
that, if you meanwhile with this operate, it you not
vex may on that to wait (if nothing Worse
ensues, regarding whose you, hope I, in Short with me con-
tent be will and also with this promise I to you
complete Knowledge of the Perspective by means of the Documents
of our Countryman and Contemporary to give, the Ru-
ler over this Subject to our Times Magister Petro de
Franceschi, who about it already a very valuable and from
us well understood Compendium made has, and further
his like a Brother dear Magister Lorenzo Ganozo da
Lendenara, who likewise in the said Subject to his Time very
high stood, as it throughout his famous Works prove,
as well the Intarsia in the worthy Choir of the Sanctum to Padua
and his Sacristy, as in Venice in the Ca. grande, as
also in Painting at the same Places and much elsewhere and also
still presently his Son Giovanmarco, my dear
Godfather, who to the highest his Father emulates, as
regarding his Works in Roico, of the worthy Choir in
our Monastery Venice, and in la Mirandola in Architecture
of the worthy, with all Comforts well equipped
Fortress; and who himself through continued Working in the worthy
Building with Drill at the Canal-ditch in Venice
known gives: so that each of you in the Whole thereof sa-
tisfied be will, although you presently to the Sufficiency well
therewith provided are. Live well and I recommend myself
to you all.

From Venice in May MDVIIII.

In Consequence of your Wish hold I the following Pro-
cedure in, namely: First become we the Architecture in three
Main-parts splitting, whereof the first regarding the public
Places of the holy Temples, the other of the to the He-
alth and Defense of the small and large States
destined and further still of the Private- and particular
Localities, the third of the to the own Comfort
necessary, the actual Dwellings handles, which us before
adverse and our Bodies harmful Things always to
protect have, for in these and around them extends this
said Subject its Powers. It would however, my Beloveds,
the Process to long be, wanted I now on these to much myself
let in, which I me, as said, reserve. So far one re-
garding the Temples not so much say could, that they re-
garding their holiest Cultus not more deserved, as our
Vitruv completely about it speaks. Of the second the Defen-
se assigned Parts would not less to say be,
so far of the Machines and military Designs any which
Kind infinitely many are, especially regarding the new Kinds
of Artillery- and War-instruments, as from the Ancients never
thought out became, in which our brave Borghesi to Foot
and Horse throughout to the highest skilled, whose Call (not
only in whole Italy), but over the whole Earth out-
goes. Like of Antonello, who with the Power of the Venetians
at the same time with the Duke Friedrich of Urbino and Count Carl
of Montone himself in the Romagna found, in order in Faenza the
San Galeotto again to insert and after the Undertaking
from a hecstic Fever pressed down, to Home re-
turned, in Urbino his Life ended, whilst him the rever-
end Father M. Zinipero and Brother Ambrosius, my flesh-
ly Brothers of the same seraphic Order assisted. This
became in the Empire to the Time King Ferdinand's at whose Unter-
taking of those of Anjou and Aragon, since he himself bravely be-
haved, from him together with his Descendants to the Lord of the
Castles made. Later became he at the Parties of the Lombardy,
under Leading of the Duke Franz of Milan, whereby he himself great-
heartedly behaved, from this rich gifted. From this stems
Alexander, worthy Condottiere at the King and the Floren-
tines and other Potentates. That Antonello let for eternal
Times our Monastery the Building of the worthy Chapel of the
Sanct Franziskus, with worthiest Equipment, which his Succes-
sors constantly expanded have. From Benedetto Bajardo called,
my near Relative, Pupil of the very famous Baldacio
d'Anghiari, who several times General-captain of the Infantry first
of the King Alfons in the Kingdom; then of the holy Church to the
Time Nicolaus; then of the Florentines at the Undertaking
of Voltera, in order it to conquer, then of the Venetians twice,
and the last time Captain of the whole Levante was. And in the
Concept to the Undertaking against Skutari to go with his
and my Nephew Franz Paciuolo from the Dysentery surprised:
left they on the last Day in Ragusa the Life. This made
from our named Citizens many capable Constable, name-
ly Gnagni della pietra, who at the Defense of Skutari
against the Turks with poisoned Spear at the Arm wounded in
Short died. This was the one, who with his Partisan
with one Blow the Head of the Taripauer to the Earth threw with many
of his Retinue; which latter through Betrayal to Spalato came,
in order the venetian Count and Nobleman to murder and
the Signoria of Venice the Land away-to-take. Of these
would the Paper not suffice to speak, with so much Bravery
has he himself always behaved. This made to the Time of the Count
Jacob in the Romagna several times out of himself the Attempt, to Foot a
large Mile with the Berber- and fast spanish Horses around
the Bet to run, whilst he only with one Finger the Stirrup
touched. From him remained as quite small Child the worthy today's
Connétable Franceschino, his Firstborn back, who always the
Rule of Venice with eager Care and Precaution lifted
has, and now has she to him the Citadel of Trieste in volun-
tary Custody given. And other of his same-kind
famous Zöglinge overgo I, like e.g. Messer Franco of
Borgo, Todaro, worthy Mercenaries of the Venetians and Martinello
da Luca, presently on Forepost before Cyprus. Not less
would to say be of his fleshly Brother Andreas,
who in Consequence of Fever the Service of our Florentine Lords
succumed and first Captain of the Infantry of the Venetian Lords
against the Germans at the Undertaking against Trient was, whereby
him, who with Wrong accused, the high Rule without other
Punishments after a Year and five Months, after they his
Innocence recognized and that All out of Envy happened, in Freedom
set, whilst to him Love and highest Position therefrom grew; and
also his surviving Son Mathäus, who always duly
supplied and momentarily to the Supervision of Asola in the
Brescian with worthy Accompany-team deputed is.
The Same overgo I regarding his other Son
Johann on Forepost before Corizza in Friaul, our other
worthy Fellow-citizen and from All loved brave Warrior
with Surname Vicodolci called; and many others, who themselves always
well in the Weapons exercised and out of this present Life
with the due Honor into the other shifted. To our
Benedetto Bajardo returning, so became in same Way from
him our worthy Citizens Cincio da Scucola with three
of his Brothers Buciuolo de Lapegio and Chiapino his Brother,
who at Lepanto in Venetian Pay succumbed, to Constables
made. Mancino belongs long to the true worthy Conné-
tables and Bartolino Ederrata, Brother of Bartolino and
many Others are from him to it named. And not less
has he from other Nations benevolent very many Brave
and Great made, like Melo of Cortona, who under Bagna-
cavello in Venetian Services died and in Ravenna buried
was; further Albanosetto, Giovan greco dalla guancia, pre-
sently to the Supervision of Rimini through the Venetian
Lords with worthy Escort of light Cavalry and Infantry
and indeed as Captain to that Place sent off. From that
Benedetto lives a Son, Baldanzonio called, who with his
Mother Elisabeth the civil Life devoted. Under the
now Living become presently just our distinguish-
ed Militaries on all Art from different Potentates u-
sed and led; the great Knight of the golden Spur,
Messer Criaco Palamides, who from my great-hearted Duke
of Urbino Guido Ubaldo as Lord equipped, who him with the
military Insignias the Castell and the Lametula called
Fortress for his good Merits gifted. This became
through our Florentine Lords always very and since he himself
in the Kingdom like in the Church-state and around Pisa and in
Pistoja at the Parties of the Panciatichi and Cancellieri with all
Bravery behaved, from the named Rule continuously very
good honored; uninjured whose, that his first Beginnings under
the high Lord of Rimini, Magnifico Ruberto de Malatesti
took place. Thesame, since he Captain of the Venetian Lords
was, as he from these to the Defense of the holy
Church against the Duke of Calabria sent become, and
her in short freed, died, and was honorably in Sanct Peter
to Rome together with the two urban Standards buried,
namely that of San Marco and of the holy Church, there-
fore Messer Criaco our Home of Borgo S. Sepulchro
not little thereby honored has. The other Markus, Warrior and
Knight of the golden Spur Messer Mastino Catani, who to
Horse the War-craft pursued, is a great Honor for
his worthy House, of which several Knights of the golden
Spur been are, namely the Father, Uncle and Grand-
father. The wonderful Knight Lord Messer Martino belongs
further still to the Citizens of the from the illustrious House
Feltri likewise honored and from my before-mentioned
great-hearted Duke because of his great Merits to the
Knight and Lord of the so-called Castell la massetta ma-
de. A Man, Assistance and Kraft, at every War-
plan, always from our Florentine Lords to the best treated.
The great Messer Gnagni'rigi, further an other Knight of the
golden Spur, who himself constantly to Horse and to Foot
in the Weapons exercises to great Honor, himself and the His
and the whole Earth unvanquished Hort, who soon at the na-
med Duke, soon at our Florentine Lords, soon with
the high Lord of Pesaro was, and momentarily at the
venetian Lords to the Guarding of Cattare with worthy
Escort as Captain of our Messer Mario de Seruardi with
his four worthy Sons Cristofanus, Peter, Franz and
Troilus deputed, who all worthy War-heroes, the Father
always as worthy Condottiere at different Feltrenser Poten-
tates and our Florentine Lords the Honor in the Age, to Home
and on Earth carried off has and in equal Way his
dear and him united Associate Marco dagnilo. From himself
self and the His and the whole Fatherland Gnagni
with the Surname Pieke covered, finds he himself still now
with his two dear Sons Andrea and Bartolomeo here,
in Venetian Pay with worthy Leadership entrusted, as Man
of great Call at them, therefor that he out of himself self an
excellent Stroke at the Undertaking against the Germans
executed, in Presence of the illustrious Duke and Lord Bartolo-
mäus Dalviano and the excellent Field-steward Messer Gior-
gio Cornaro and Messér Andrea Gritti, who his good Behavior
in the Senate reported, wherefor he on Ground of his Leadership good
rewarded became. And further to the Protection of Fiume as Captain
with his named Sons and his fleshly Nephew
GiuHan Paulo deputed, who likewise deputed Captain of the
Florentine Lords, glorifies he at the same time with the Others his
House and the His and the whole Earth through his excell-
ent and famous Deeds to Livorno and other situated
Places of the said Rule. I overgo the brave Constable
Bronchino likewise, our Countryman, who at the Undertaking
of Citerna through the Vitelli killed was. And his Goro
at the Party of Pistoja and likewise his Vitello let I
at Side, who for our Florentine Lords, whilst he himself ex-
cellently held, at Pisa under Pikes and Lances his Life left.
Also Paulo Dapici held in Skutari for the Venetians with the
aforementioned Gnagni of Borgo, and in la Castellina for our
Florentine Lords in the War with the Duke of Calabria always
with worthiest Defense-means on his Post, a Man
to the Bulwark and to the Defense, thelike himself to his
Times under the Infantry no Other found. I overgo further,
whom I first name had to, Papia and Papo de Pandolpho his
Nephew, who under the Foot-troops, the Father worthy Conné-
table, and he himself Banner-leader, never behind their Duty her
with the Lazy and Fearful driven were. Now
have I — in order it short to grasp — my Beloveds, of
the mentioned Part of the Architecture to the public De-
fense as of the Walls and Counter-walls, Pinnacles, En-
mantelings, Towers, Ravelins, Bastions and other Defense-
weirs, great Towers, Casemates etc. occasionally
with all once Living and Dead spoken, as it sometimes
in the Talk itself meets, I have me with the One or
Other much with the evident and tangible
Experience labored, soon on this, soon on that Art
arguing and their Reasons hearing and not less
with the high Lordliness Messer Johann Jacob, Traulzi with
the then worthy Speaker of the Florentine Government
Pier Vetori in Presence of the Fontano in the Palace of the Count
de Sarno in Naples; and not less with the Noble and
worthy Condottiere Lord Camillo Vitelli out of Città de
Castello, to whom I three Years long the sublime Work of our
Euclid lectured; and to Milan with my special
Patron to that Time Messer Galeazzo Sanseverino, and sever-
al times with the most excellent Duke Ludwig Maria Sforza.
Finally find we, that this Part of the Defense in
our Times very far-going be, through the new Machines
of the Artillery, which themselves to the Time of our Vitruv not yet
found, and therefore become we this for now at Side
let and become him for further Discussion reserve.

The third Part said Architecture of the Com-
fort and the Needs as well of the Palaces and other
Buildings inside and outside, with all their Dispositions,
namely Rooms, Ante-rooms, Halls, Galleries, Work-rooms,
Kitchens, Stables, Theaters and Amphitheaters, Baths, Latrines,
Wells, Sources, Water-conduits, Bake-ovens, Cross-walks,
Stairs, Windows, Balustrades, Streets, Ways, Places for
Market and others to the Walking, covered and free with
their prescribed Symmetries of the Relations and Propor-
tionalities to the whole Body of the Building and its Parts
and inner and outer Members, whereof to the Sufficiency our Vitruv
speaks, and also Frontinus regarding the Aqueducts, as it
at the from Marini her to the Thermes of the Diocletian di-
rected antique roman Arches and other Baths of
Pozuolo and Viterbo itself shows; regarding whose not little
Symmetry of the Proportions and Proportionality required,
let we likewise for future Investigation at Side and
become for now only an other for all three above na-
med very necessary discuss, which, as I doubt-
less assured am, to you useful come will, in which you, as
I understand, presently throughout good schooled are, whilst
you in the Sculpture Phidias and Praxiteles imitate, whose
Works on Monte Cavallo in Rome them famous and for ever
celebrated make. For no Part of the Architecture is at all
possible, well adorned to be, if the Stone-masses not with
pretty Marble-, Porphyry-, Serpentine-adornment or other ver-
different Kinds adorned, like with Columns, Cornices and Gable-
walls and other Ornaments, likewise to the defensive and
public Part, as to that of the Sanctuaries appropriate. And because
this Part the Buildings by so more adorns, by how much more
he with necessary Carefulness on Proportions, Propor-
tionality ordered, which Things to you and each, who himself
in just such exercises, highly necessary are, of whom never-
theless quite expressly our Vitruv not speaks, whilst
er them throughout presupposes: so will I me here be-
sonders endeavor, them according to him duly to you
clear and distinct to make, so far it the good Stone-
mason concerns, whilst in this Work something of the Drawing and
Knowledge of the Level and Compass or Sexto presupposed becomes,
without which Instruments man no Success obtain can. And
of our Discourse become we three short Parts make,
to the Number of the three at Beginning of this of the divine Propor-
tion titled Work, set up Examples corresponding. Name-
ly first become we of the Proportion of the Man re-
garding his Body and his Members talk, because from the
human Body every Measure with its Namings co-
mes, and in thesame all Kinds Proportions and Propor-
tionalities with the Finger-hint of the Highest, by means of the
inner Secrets of the Nature themselves find again. And therefore
become, as said, all our Measures and Instruments, which
from Public and Private-persons for Measurements applied
become, after the human Body named; the one Arm
(Ell), the other Step, the third Foot, Palm (Hand), El-
bow, Finger, Head etc. named. And likewise shall we, like
our Vitruv says, to him similar, every Building with the whole
after its Members well proportioned Body, corresponding
proportion. And therefore become we first of just this
human Measure with its Relations to its Members
talk, whereafter you you at your Stone-hewing-works to direct
have will, especially regarding the Gable-sides and other
worthy Temple-facades, Gates and Palaces, which man always u-
sed, with Cornice, Columns and Architraves to adorn, like
to the Sufficiency our Vitruv about it says. But because to our Times
his Words from us bad understood become, since they in the
Deed somewhat stranger-like are, as he himself it says, that they, for-
ced through the Art-works, set up became, so says he
this Thing because of Following in his Book: This but can
at the Descriptions of the Architecture not happen, since the
Words, which from the actual Need of the Art ta-
ken in the ordinary Talk to the Sense Darkness
add. Since thesame therefore at themselves not clear and also at
their ordinary Use the Designations not open-
kundig etc. This in the Preface of his fifth Book
of the Architecture, whereby he inserts, that, if the
History-writers their History tell, they their appropria-
te Expressions have, and the Poets their Verse-feet and
Measures, with their determined Accentuation etc. But so hits
it itself not with the Architects, which forced-way
Foreign-words use must, which for the Understand-
ing sometimes Darkness generate etc. And therefore become I
me endeavor, their Sense to reveal, as it, so far it the
Purpose concerns, sufficient is. And first become we of the
round Columns talk, as you them at the Buildings with your
Chisels as well regarding the Strength to the Support of the Building
as with Reference to their Adornment duly to or-
der have. And then become we of the Epistyl or Archi-
trav and of his Composition talk. After we of these
spoken, so become we them at the Work of a Gate
bring, which after the at the Temple Solomon's to Jeru-
salem after Annunciation of the Prophet Ezechiel with the
remaining Orders designed. And you can then with
your Genius more or less therefrom make.
