Cap. II.

Of the Distance of the Profile to the Occipital Bone said Head, i.e. to the Point a, which man Occipital Bone calls, and from the Parts, which lie between, Eye and Ear.

After of the Profile of the human Head and its
principally required Divisions spoken, so become
we in Following speak of the Proportions of the Eye
and Ear. So that man because of this understand, what we say, so
become we first on the equal Art the Width of the proposed
Tetragon sk in three equal Parts divide, as it with its
Length happened. And after ms in three equal Parts de-
composed, so be the one mo, the other oq, the third qs. And so-
then become we to greater Clarity for you each of these
Thirds in two equal Parts divide, and indeed in the Poin-
ts n, p, r. And each of them is the sixth Part of the
whole given Width ms. And these become we still once
in two other Halves decompose can, and that would
Twelfths of the Whole be, and these again in two other
equal Parts and each would the 24th Part of the Whole be.
And so could we  proceed, as far as it us pleases, whilst
we them in us known Parts according to greater or smaller
Width decompose. And the more Parts known are, so much more comfortable
is it for the Perspectivist, because itself thereby with the Eye
better the Size of the Object grasp lets, which man rep-
resent wants, be it Head, or be it, what man otherwise wants, like
Animals, Trees, Buildings. And to this Purpose have themselves
the Painters a certain Quadrangle or elongated Tetragon 1) for-
med, which with many fine Cither-strings or Silk or large
and small Sinews through-drawn, as it to them at the Works
appropriate seems, which they in Canvas on Table or Wall
to design have. After thereby the Artist said Te-
tragon over the actual Form placed, and thesame well fas-
tened, so that it on no Art waggle can, between himself
and the Object which he to depict intends, which Object
according to the Position, as man her make wants, likewise well
fastened be must, so prepares he himself thereon to, straight to
stand, kneeling, as it to him at the best accommodated to stand
seems and whilst he with his attentive Eye soon here,
soon there that Object on-looks, considers he the Borders
of those Threads, as they the Length and the Width after over be-
said Object correspond. And so prepare they themselves to,
thesame with their Pen on the Sheet or elsewhere to-
record, whilst they the small Squares said Tetragon
the Number and Size after larger or smaller according to that pro-
portion, and form so out the Raw out their Figures,
which they afterwards with the Grace of the Face clothe. And
this Instrument becomes from them Net called; as you here at the
Head see, of which Instrument I me here not
worry an other Form to set up, since after the Said
his Understanding easy is. Now to our Object,
the Head returning, so become you find, that the
Eye with the upper and lower 1) Brows of the Eyelids
usually a Sixth of the whole Profile mb high be, what
I not with Lines to darken me worried, but you
become it with your Compass easy find, and just as wide.
Regarding the Ear, if you good thereupon pay attention, become you find,
that it so high as the Length of the Nose, i.e. a Third of the
said Profile and a Sixth of the Width said Tetragon
ms is, and its largest Extension is diametrical between
the Occipital Bone and Nose-back, straight over the Ca-
thetusa, which underneath at the Nose-tip and the Beginning of the
Cheek ends. The Neck is two Thirds said Width ms, i.e. so
thick like os, and just as much corresponds to the Distance from the Tip
of the Breast to the Larynx-knot. The Hind-head, i.e. after our
Way the rear Skull-bone, exceeds said Width
straight around two Thirds of its sixth Part i.e. around a
Ninth of the whole ms. The Vertex, i.e. the Summit of the Head
exceeds the Root of the Main-hairs around a Sixth be-
said ms in Height, namely to the Point p, which its
Middle is. The other Parts take then in their Cir-
cumference proportional from p to o n in the Angle-point
of the Tetragon to fore, and likewise backwards from named
p to qrs proportional off, with that Grace and Good-thinking,
which at the Chin and Hair-roots after them as irrational Pro-
portions designated, i.e. as unnameable through any a
Number and its exact Parts.

And this might I regarding the whole Head or
Main enough be let and we become now continuing from the
said Head, his appropriate Relation to the whole
Body and his other outer Members speak, so that you
accordingly your Works better shape can.

1) Rectangle.
1) It lacks hereto in the German the correct Expression.
