Cap. III.

Of the Proportion of the whole human Body, which to his Head and other Members his Length and Width after well ordered be.

After we to the Sufficiency the Relation of the Head to its
essential Parts its Width and Profile after discussed,
so become we now of the Relation just of the Head with Re-
ference to his whole Body and the other outer Members
speak, so that your Works themselves easier proportion can,
especially at the Columns, which at the Buildings to the Support
of their Weight and Beauty of their Anlage attached, as further
below of them still enough the Talk be will, with Reference
to your Intention. And therefore say we with the Ancients, especially
our Vitruv, the whole Length of the Man, i.e. from the Foot-
soles, the Ground-planes of the physical Mass itself, be usual-
ly ten times so large, like from the Chin to the highest Part of the
Forehead, i.e. to the Hair-roots, so that said Skull, i.e.
the Bone of just this Height the tenth Part regarding
his Height to the highest Tip said Forehead amounts to. And this
Height becomes usually from the Painters and old Sculptors as
Head-length at their Works accepted, like at Statues and
other Figures in Rome the Experience us always proven has and
like always from New the ours with all Carefulness thesame show.
And the given Measures understand themselves always, in order themselves not
to err, from the bare, from the Flesh pure Bones as
well of the Head, as of the other Parts, otherwise would the u-
sual Rules false be, because some Men corpulent
and very full Flesh, others lean and dry are, as man
sees. And therefore hold themselves the Ancients to the Bones,
as to something Firmer and less Changeable, so that
man in our Lecture for usual under Head exactly the
whole before cited Profile mk to understand has. Just as
much amounts to exactly the flat Hand from the Hand-joint, that means from the
End of the Elbow-bone to the outmost Tip of the Middle-finger,
which a Head-length and indeed a Tenth of the whole Stature
on the said Art yields. The Height of the whole Head from the
lower Chin-surface to the Tip of the Head, i.e. to the Point g,
makes the eighth Part of her whole Height, whilst the Size
from the Hair-root to his highest Vertex thereto-reckoned.
From the highest Tip of the Breast to the Root of his Hairs,
i.e. from g to ms is the sixth Part of the Whole and from
said highest Tip of the Breast to the Vertex, i.e. to
the Point g is the fourth Part of his whole Height. His Mouth
lies as above said on a Third of the Height from the Chin to
to the Nostrils, the Nose is just as high 1). The whole Space
before the Nose to to the Hair-root becomes Forehead called, which
a Third of his whole Profile high is and the whole Length
of the Foot, namely from the Heel to the Tip of the big
Toe, makes the sixth Part of the whole Body, i.e. as much
as from the uppermost End of the Breast to the Vertex of the
Head. And the whole Breast 2) amounts to the fourth Part. And
this All assures our Vitruv, as he of the Anlage of the
holy Temples speaks, where he in this Way speaks namely:
for the Nature has our human Body so together-
set, that the Skull-bone from the Chin to the highest
Tip of the Forehead and the lowest Hair-roots his tenth
Part amount to. Further the outstretched Hand from the Joint
to the outmost Tip of the Middle-finger just as much. The
Head from the Chin to the highest Vertex an Eighth, with
Inclusion of the lowest Skull-bones, from the highest Part
of the Breast to the lowest Hair-roots a Sixth, to
to the highest Vertex a Quarter ofthesame; the Height of the
Mouth but amounts to a Third of the Distance from the lowest
Chin to the lowest Part of the Nostrils. The Nose
from the lowest Part of the Nostrils to the middle Li-
niting-line of the Eyebrows just as much. From this End
to the lowest Hair-roots reaches the Forehead, likewise
a Third. The Foot but amounts to the sixth Part of the
Height of the Body, and the Elbow 1) the fourth. The Breast
likewise the fourth. Also the remaining Members have an
Even-measure of the Proportion, which also the old Painters and
noble Sculptors applied, and thereby great, infinite
Praise achieved have. Similar-wise but must the Members
of the holy Temples to the total Sum of their from the
individual Parts formed total Size the most appro-
priate weighed Symmetry receive. Likewise is the
middle Center of the Body naturally the Navel etc.,
as we above said, whilst we, as also he it in this does,
the Circle and the Square in the human Body recorded
etc. Those, who that said Height in ten Parts divide,
said, that she after the perfect Number divided be, whilst
they perfect the Ten-number call, from the in our great
Work in the first Distinction second Tractate brought
Reasons, since with the Ten-number all Philosophers conten-
ted are, namely with the Number of the ten Predicaments, re-
garding whose All agree, wherefor the Greeks say
Theleon, because they saw, that the Nature at Hands and
Feet lo Fingers made and therefore, as our Vitruv says,
pleased it also the divine Philosopher Plato, as from the
peculiar Things generated, which at the Greeks Mo-
nades become. And this the Naturalists according. But the
Mathematicians call perfect the first Six-number, 28
the second etc., as we in our mentioned Work
said and indeed on Ground of the Conditions, which in the
last Sentence of the ninth Book our Euclid following-measure
out-speaks: Since the Numbers from the Unity continuously together-
joined been, which doubled the first real Number form,
so generates the latter among them, if she with the Sum
of those multiplied becomes, the perfect Number. Adds man therefore
this Consideration according to 10 and 6 together, what 16 makes,
i.e. the perfect philosophical and the perfect ma-
thematical 6, so results from this Connection a third
Number, namely 16, and this call they, as Vitruv says, the
most perfect, because she from the two afore-named perfectly
together-set and made be; which Naming
I not to blame dare, but I lead in the Progress also
our-sides an other mathematical Reason on, namely
she can the most perfect of the Quadrature because of called
become, because she herself the Square of the first Square is,
which 4, what the first Census 1) makes with Exclusion
of the Queen of all Numbers, the Unity. And the 16 is her
Square, i.e. Census from the Census, 2) what next to the hers
not absurd is.

And so that also the named Parts better present,
so seemed it to me not useless, here to the Side at the Edge a
Line for the whole normal-measure human Stature after all
those Measures divided, which from the Antiques and Moderns
accepted become, to record. This say we, be the Line
ab, which in the Points c d e f g h k l m in 10 equal Parts di-
vided. And from these become you out of you self some exacter
determine, where they not hit. After this can you immediately
with a Compass-opening, what to you seems, in Proportion bring,
under all Circumstances, as above said, the bare Bones
presupposed. And therewith become you the Foot have, because the
first Height, as Vitruv says, the Track of the human Foot
corresponding was, namely Head and Elbow etc. The
already given Proportions according to can you in your
Works an other larger or smaller accept, which,
if she well in her Sub-divisions divided, his Height
correspond will, be it a Giant or Dwarf and man will
her correct tapered call.

And after similar Method behave themselves the Cosmo-
graphers in their World- and other Sea-maps, whilst they their
Measure-staff to the Side set, with which they the whole World propor-
tion etc. It would hereof much other in the Man la-
id Parts to name be, so far he from the Wise small World
called been. Nevertheless, since I here not intend of
said Architecture, as we before said have, completely
to handle, whilst we us the already mentioned for more
Leisure reserve, so will I them for your Purpose regarding
the Sculpture enough be let. And we become in the Following
to the intended Task namely to the Design round Columns,
and their Pilasters, Bases and Capitals arrive, as I to you
promised, whilst we them after the human Figure pro-
portion, from which we them first derived, as you from our
Vitruv understand become and we become him in that Part
cite, whilst we his Words wordly here-set, so that
you attentive be, and with Zeal them to you note become.

1) I.e. like the Distance from the Chin to the Nose-spine.
2) seil. Width.
1) i.e. from the Elbow-joint to the Middle-finger-tip.
1) Square.
2) Biquadrat.
