Cap. IV.

It follows of the round Columns with their Bases and Capi-
tals and Pilasters or Stylobates.

Since I to you in Short the Necessary over the round
Columns give want, so become I this Section in two
Main-parts splitting, in the first become I of the Column and
its Ground-surface and Capital, in the second of their Stylobates
or also Pilaster or Basament, after Some, speak. I
say as above, it must itself every Member of every Building to
the whole said Building proportion, as every Member
of the Man to the whole Man formed been, what us
the Nature through Example before Eyes placed has. And so that
also the Foreign-words, as it before from Vitruv stated, in the
Spirit no Darkness generate, who them sometimes Ionic,
sometimes Doric and Corinthian calls, so know, that these
Names to them from the Ancients after the Fatherland given
been, where they first found; Ionic at the Ionians,
corinthian at the Corinthians, doric likewise. And some-
times becomes the Word from the first Inventor derived. Now may
to you thesame no Disgust cause. For Vitruv
explains it completely, therefore worry I me here not,
me to much to spread. You must note, that as we in
our christian Religion different Saints of both
Sexes have, and each therein his Signs and Instru-
ments give and attribute, according as they for the Faith
fought, like the holy Georg the Weapons, Lance, Cuirass,
Helmet, Sword and Horse with all Armature, likewise the ho-
ly Moritz and holy Eustachius and the Maccabees etc.
and man the holy Katharina the Wheel, because she with this for
the Faith crowned, the holy Barbara the Tower gives,
wherein she incarcerated, and so over all Saints Men and
Women discussing, the Church to their Reminder Similar,
what in our Eyes to the Inflaming of the holy Faith
do to be allowed permits, whilst she herself throughout not about
Tyrants worried, since the holy Gods the Blows of the
Executioners not feared, exactly so, those their erring Reli-
gion-customs according to their Idols and Gods soon on
the one, soon on the other Way any which Ornaments
made, corresponding to the Form of their Effect, in Trophies,
Temples and Columns, whilst they thesame after their Names
or Fatherland named and baptized, where they first Origin
taken. (As in the Histories of the Romans said becomes, that
Fabius from the Beans so named, and others say, that the
Beans from Fabius named be. And likewise reads man of
Appius, that he, because they (from him) eaten were, named
been, after the Apples, and others want, that "Apie",
i.e. said Apples, after Appius named be, who them first
in those Regions brought etc.,and likewise happens it at
even these and they made one of these Works more beautiful
than the other, according to the Piety of this or this, wherein
eager worked be will, like for Hercules, Mars, Jupiter
etc., for Diana, Minerva, Ceres etc., as of all
completely our Vitruv mentions.) From there to our Purpose
returning, so used the Ancients the Height of the round Column
with the whole Height, which they with their Capital to make
intended, 1) in eight equal Parts to decompose. And then
divided they thesame said Height again in ten equal
Parts. And the one of thesame took they from the Eighth
away, so that thereby exactly the fortieth Part of the whole be-
said Height left over remained, 2) i.e. one of forty Parts,
and this kept they as Abacus of his Capital, as you in
the to Beginning of this whole Letter set up Figure said
Abacus-height l n or m o given have, which sometimes from Moderns
Cornice called becomes. And from the Height of the whole Tenth
made they the Bell or Drum, or we want say
the Vine-work of the Capital, what thesame says, to the Throat
or Narrowing of the upper Part of the Column, like lg or mh,
which All with its Abacus to the highest Part said
Bell Capital called becomes. There says man Volute, which
in four Corners of the named Capital out-runs, as you the
Tip l and the Tip m see. From one Corner or Angle
of the Abacus or Cornice-plate to the other becomes Tetrant
called, namely that Space, which between one and the other
Corner lies, namely n o, so that in every Abacus four Tetrants
are. In whose Middle uses man a large Flower or Rose
or other Leaf to the Adornment to make, i.e. one per
Tetrant, and it becomes Eye of the Capital called. These Tetran-
ts become on following Art formed, namely: man takes the
Diameter of the Tapering underneath, i.e. from that Throat,
which itself underneath the Basis finds, and thesame dou-
ble man, and make him to the Diagonal of a Square,
which exactly in the Circle lies. And this Square is exactly
the Abacus said Capital. And that Tetrant becomes to-
wards the Center said Quadrangle towards hollow or rounded made,
whilst man him around a Ninth of the Side of the said Quadrangle
curves, i.e. curved to the Position of his Eye in the Front.
And this becomes soon more, soon less adorned, according to that, who
the Expenditure makes and orders, with one or two Abacus
over one another placed, as it to him better suits, after Pleasure, in-
dem man the prescribed Proportions of their Gradations
keeps, which at every Design always as observed presupposed
become, whilst man them rationally down-sets, i.e.
to smaller Measure reduces, and them increases, i.e. to large-
er on-grow lets, like at the Designs to all Models,
which first made become, which according to the Architect neces-
sarely the whole therein Contained on the real
Building to apply understand must etc. And this suffice, so-
far it itself on his Capital refers, which the corinthian
belongs to.

1) Cfr. the regarding Figure at the End of the Tractate.
