Cap. VI.

It follows, how the Arrangement of the Stylobate or Pilaster, or Basament of the Column made become.

The Stylobate is the Support of the Column, which we Pilaster or
Basament of the Column call, as you in the four-sided Figure
C (ie/ see/) which likewise his Basis abcd and his Capital
or Cornice efnm, with their Gradations, Plinth, Cushion,
Scotien, Quaders after Will made and adorned receives.
But he himself is in the Width exactly limited, around so much like
the Length of the Plinth of the Basis of the on them standing Column
amounts to, as you the Plinth of the truncated Column hg equal
large see and therefore with the Width of the Stylobate ef and cd
in the Plumb, since he otherwise the thereupon standing Weight not sup-
port would, if he askew stood. And you see, how the
whole Basis of the Column, abgkl on thesame stands, and although
his Beauty the Eye corresponds. Therefore is the Arrangement
said Gradations, may it Quaders or Scotien apply,
such, that always their Projections or Fore-standings from both
Sides so far out-step, like they wide or high are, so that
said Projections right and left always Squares corre-
sponded, if it also 10.000 in his Basis and his Capital
were, what also, as you further below understand become, in the Architrav
and his Cornice observed become must. And if you at the
said Stylobate prefer an Ornament make wanted as the
Other, as man with Leaft-work or Animals uses, so make it
inside his Surface such, that his Equidistants cdef
and also ce and df not away-deleted become. And said
Stylobate must two of his Widths high be, or, want you
say, exactly so much, like two Lengths of the Column-plinth,
so that he correctly in the one as in the other Way,
namely after the Strength of the Weight and the Beauty for
the Eye proportioned be, the remaining Parts of the Building
corresponding, as you it from the Example of the Shape of the
Speciosa called Gate see, which to Beginning of the Book
placed, consisting of the Column, Stylobate, Epistyl and
Cornice, so that to you their Connection known become. This
Pilaster must from the Foundation out underneath good fastened be,
at and for himself self and for All what thereupon placed, so that
he at least whole under the Earth to to the grown Soil
from a good Mason level founded, otherwise would
your Works with the whole Building together-fall. And man
must his Width at least so large make, like exactly the
Basis of the Stylobates ab occupies, if not more. And note
well, that the Projections of his Basis ab cd from both Sides
her so far to Outer fore-step must, like those of his Capi-
tals efmn or those of the Basis. Sometimes can you them longer
than those of his Capital make, but never shorter, as you in
the said Figure Example-wise see, etc. His Foundation
becomes from the Ancients Steriobat called, and man understands thereunder
so much like exactly the Basis of the Stylobates ab thereof occupies,
so that you to you All to the Imagination bring.

With Reference hereupon become you you still regarding
the Steps as well of the Basis as of the Capital said
Stylobates to note have, that thesame sometimes according to
the Places, where they themselves find, different Names have,
for you become an Ornament at a Gate and an
other just such at the Window and Chimney attach, which
likewise their Naming, i.e. Door-posts, Door-hinge, En-
closure etc. have. Likewise happens it here at the Stylobate
at the Basis and Capital. For the highest Step of his
Capital becomes at the Ancients Akrotherion, the following Cor-
nice-plate and from the Ours Gutter-ledge the third Ridge,
the fourth Echinus and from the Ours, egg-shaped Adornment
called, the fifth Baltheus or Trochilus. The Ours
say here Staff, at the seventh say the Antiques Tenia,
the Ours at that, which immediately above of the Stylo-
bates is, Panel. And you become it at your Genius, I
am sure, better understand than I it say. From Many use in
named Pilaster beautiful antique Letters inlaid to become,
from Some such ordered, that they their Intention say and nar-
rate, with all Proportion and likewise at other Gable-walls
and Enclosures and Monuments, their Grave-scripts, which without
Doubt the Art-work very beautiful make. Therefore have I here
at the End still in this Volume from the divine Proportion
named, the Art and Form of a worthy antique Alphabet
with all its Relations set up, by means of whose you in
your Works write can, what to you occur will, and
they become without Doubt from All recommended become, whilst
I you in Knowledge set, that I me because of this alone in-
duced found, it in given Form to order, so that the
Writers and Miniature-painters, who themselves so miserly make, them to
demonstrate, here clear were, that without their Pen and Brush
the two mathematical Lines, curved and straight, they
may want or not, they 1) to the Compelition lead, as they
also all other Things make, so far without them it not pos-
sible, any an Object well to form, as you com-
pletely from the Arrangements all regular and from them
dependent Bodies above in this see, which from the worthiest
Perspective-painter, Architects, Musicians and with all Abilities
equipped Leonardo da Vinci from Florence in the City
Milan made became, as we us in the Service of the il-
lustrious Duke, that Ludwig Maria Sforza Anglo, in the
Years of our Salvation from 1496 to 1499 again found, from where
we afterwards together to different Purposes in those
Affairs departed and to Florence also together li-
ved etc. And likewise sound also said Names at
the Basis said Stylobate with Addition of Tip, Shaft,
Panel etc. And the very beautiful Forms said
material Bodies have I with all Delicacy here in Milan
with my own Hands manufactured, colored and adorned,
and their Number amounted to sixty of regular and their de-
pendent. Likewise have I just as much for my Patron
Lord Galleazzo Sanseverino at that Place manufactured, and
then just as many in Florence as Exemplars of His Excellency
our Lord, constant Gonfaloniere P. Soderino, which themselves
presently in his Palace find.

1) seil. the Letters.
