Cap. VII.

Wherein the three Kinds of said Columns themselves from one another distin-
guish.

You must still note, that said Sorts of
Columns, namely doric, ionic and corinthian all as far
as it their Basis and Stylobate concerns, on one and the same Art
made become. But their Capitals are different. That of the
ionic, or want you say of the cushioned, is melancholic,
because it itself not bold to Above elevates, what something Melancholic
and Worth-lamenting, Widow-like represents. Said Capital
elevates only the Half of the Main, i.e. the half Thickness of the
Column without other Abacus and other Cornice; rather
she has only rings-around downwards against the Length of the Column to-
wards turned Volutes after Art of sad Women with tangled
Hair. But the corinthian has her Capital elevated and with
Leaf-work adorned, and Volutes with their Abacus and Cor-
nice, as said been, after Art of the youthful, well-behaved,
merry and with their Wreaths adorned; whose Instance she
dedicated. And at even these became it at the Ancients us-
ual, to greater Adornment her Height in eight equal Parts to
divide, and the one to the Thickness, i.e. Diameter of her lower
Tapering to make, so that they at the Sight greater Beau-
ty offered. But these uses man not at too heavy
burdening Buildings, rather at graceful Places, like Loggias,
Gardens, Galleries 1) and other Places to the Walking up-to-
set. The Doric have their Capitals to the already said
Measure and Proportion corresponding high, but not with so much
Ornament, rather barer and simpler Drum, or Tym-
panon, to the Man similar, like Mars, Hercules etc., to whom
they to their Honor dedicated. And these Sorts (although today
little spread), since they pure and simple are, are stronger than
the Corinthian, in order the Weight to withstand. Their Height
used the Ancients in six equal Parts to divide. For the
Ionians, since they their Even-measure not had, rather such on good
Luck at the Temple applied, whilst they the Form and Track
or Foot-steps of the human Foot discovered found, in-
dem they thesame to his Stature proportioned, that he the
sixth Part of the Height of the human Body be, and after
this Relation accustomed they themselves first the Height and
Thickness said round Columns to make, as our Vitruv
in the fifth Book at the Beginning of the first Chapter and further
in the seventh says, to the Places corresponding, where man them to-
order has. And so are also the ionic highly fitting
to the Weights, which similar to the doric divided become,
although they, as of the doric said, since they the Eye
no Beauty offer, nowadays a little 1) applied become.
The Reminder thereon will to you very serviceable be, the Things
more useful than pompous to make, if it to you free stands,
over it to dispose. Otherwise obey the Paying and more
gives it not.

How that also be, it have themselves from Time and Time suc-
ceeding different Genies and Nations accustomed, said
Columns after Pleasure to make and those, and their Capitals, Bases
and Stylobates, and likewise each of their Parts, and also at the
remaining Bau-works different to name, as Vitruv at the End
of the first Chapter of his fourth Book says, namely: "It
gives but Kinds of Capitals, which even these Columns up-
set and with different Expressions named become,
at which we neither Peculiarities of the Even-measures,
nor an other Column-genus name can, rather
we see, that their Expressions from corinthian and cush-
ioned and doric translated and changed, whose
Even-measures at newer" etc. such, that today from All
a Through-one-another made become, whilst they them after their
Way name. But only the Capitals make they after their
Manifoldness different. And to your Comfort and our
Confirmation of the here made crowded Investigation set
I here the worthiest Authority of our Vitruv exactly her, from
his aforementioned fifth Book pulled-out, namely: "These
Stems, as they the Carians and Lelegians out-thrown, have
that Region of the Land after their Leader Ion Ionia named,
and they began there Temples of the immortal Gods pre-
paring, Sanctuaries to build, and erected first to the
Apollo Pandion a Temple, as they it in Achaia seen,
and named him "doric", because they in the doric Com-
munities first him on this Art built seen. As they at
this Temple Columns up-set wanted and no Even-measure
for thesame had and after-searched, on which Way they
effect could, that they as well to the Bearing of the Burden suitable
were, as also at the Sight a tested Beauty had,
so measured they the Track of the male Foot and transferred
this to the Height. Since they found, that the Foot the sixth
Part of the Height of the Man be, so transferred they that also
to the Column, and from the Thickness, wherewith they the Basis of the
Shaft made, carried they six times so much with Inclusion of the
Capital in the Height on. So began the doric Column the
Proportion and Firmness and Beauty of the male Body
at the Buildings to represent. Likewise led they later, as
they to the Diana a Temple to build sought, a Genus
new Art from the same Tracks to the female Tenderness
over and made first the Thickness of the Column from the eighth Part,
in order a more sublime Species to have; to the Basis added they the
Spira as Shoe be; at the Capital brought they Volutes on,
equal-as as curled Locks, which right and left out-
hung and adorned the Foreheads with Cymatium and
Encarps (Fruit-cord) instead of the ordered Hairs and let
over the whole Stem Furrows like Folds of the Garment
after matron-like Custom down. So have they the In-
vention of the Columns after two Distinctions: the one Species
naked without male Adornment, the other in female
Fineness and Adornment and Symmetry applied. The
Later but, who in Elegance and Fineness of the Judgement further
fort-stepped, since they themselves at slenderer Measures more pleased,
set seven Diameters of the Thickness for the Height of the do-
ric, nine for that of the ionic fast. That but, what the Ionians
first made, becomes ionic called. The third but, which
corinthian called becomes, has the Imitation of the virginal
Slenderness, because the Virgins because of their tender Age
with slenderer Members formed, in the Dress-adornment more graceful
Effects receive. From the first Invention of her Capital
but becomes mentioned, that she following-measure taken place: a
corinthian Citizen-girl, already to the Wedding ripe, died, from
a Sickness befallen; after her Burial brought the Nurse
the Flower-pots, whereat herself That Virgin pleased, collected
and in a Basket together-placed to her Grave-monument
and placed it above thereupon, and so that those themselves under free Heaven
longer held, covered she a Shard thereover. This Basket was
accidentally over the Root of an Acanthus placed; meanwhile
poured the middle Root of the Acanthus, from the Weight pressed,
Leaves and Stems against the Spring-time, whose Stalks the
Sides of the Basket along growing and from the Corners of the
Shard through the Necessity of the Weight out-pressed
forced became, to the outmost Ends towards Snail-
windings to make. There remarks Callimachus, who because of
his Elegance and Fineness in the Art of the Marble from the
Athenians Katatechnos called become was, in the Past-going at
this Monument that Basket and the rings-around germinating Ten-
derness of the Leaves, and makes, from the Art and Novelty of the Form
pleased, after that Pattern Columns at the Corinthians and
set the Even-measures fast, thereby that he the Relations of the
corinthian Style at the Execution of Works al-
lotted. The Symmetry but just of the Capital is so to be-
work-place, that, just as large like the Thickness of the lower
Column was etc."

1) Baiadere actually: uppermost Deck.
1) Text shall ; poco instead of pero be called.
