Cap. VIII.

Where now more normally constructed Columns are found, which in Italy from the Ancients and also the Moderns manufactured.

I know me not to think, my Dearest, why
our Countryman Leonbattista deli Alberti from Florence, at
whom I several times Months long in the divine Rome to the Time
of the Pope Paul Barbo from Venice in own House from him
on his Costs always good treated become, a Man, certainly of
very great Sharp-view and Learnedness in the human
Subjects and Rhetoric as from his deep-sinnig Words in
his Work over Architecture illuminates, whilst he in thesame
so in-going speaks, therein not the moral Proof-ground
observed have, which to Each to an allowed Duty makes,
for the Fatherland to fight. And he, not only that he
the his with some Words in the said Work not
recommends, lets in the Opposite much more the Honor, which
from Others to him attributed, here regarding this architec-
tural Ability to the large Part extinguished. For
Vitruv glorifies it at many Places of his Book as well
regarding the Columns, as also the remaining Parts, whilst he
sometimes of these Columns says: "after Tuscan Art a-
dorned" to their greatest Recommendation, and sometimes says: "as it
at the Tuscan illuminates," which Things he not otherwise than
to the Praise and to the Recommendation says. Our Leonbattista says
of such Places after Italic Art, whilst he them Italic
calls and on no Art calls he them Tuscan, what surely
not without greatest Wondering remains, so far from that her
he and the His always because of this honored have become. Therefore become
I with the Apostle speak: "I praise you, but therein praise
I you not" etc. It seems to me therefore appropriate,
to you here regarding thesame with our Vitruv and also re-
garding the remaining the Truth according to to say, where themselves
today in Italy Columns, especially round find, which, if
not throughout, so yet mostly the antique Marks
keep, especially from our Vitruv, what also Vitruv still
to note uses. As he in Rome not those Parts of the
Architecture found, which he handled, said he open: "But
to Rome is this Genus not to have, rather to Athens
or elsewhere" as it to him known was. So become I to you
speak. In Florence found I said Architecture very glori-
fied, especially then as the magnificent Lorenzo Medici himself thereon
to enjoy began: who regarding the Models very in
thesame well-versed was, what to me through One known became,
that he with own Hands his highest Servant, Giuliano
da Maglino to the worthy Doglievolo named Palace
in the City Naples designed, where I me to that Time
with our Catano Catani from Borgo and many Others our
merchant Fellow-citizen found, so that, who today in Italy
and outside build wants, immediately to Florence around Archi-
tects his Refuge takes. Yes, I say the Truth, the
Success hides it not, go to Florence and regarding their
Villas find themselves in Italy no so well with all Carefulness
her-directed Buildings. There become you, in order of our
Columns to talk, in Santa Croce our Monastery at the Convent of
Different very worthy ordered, 1) to the Symmetry of all
remaining Parts said Convent according to find, which to the
worthy Build-works of Italy belongs. Also in San Spirito, a
modern Building very fitting and well ordered Columns,
and much more, without Comparison in the worthy and rich a-
dorned Patronage of the lordly House of Medici Sancta
Lorenzo, which under the other Buildings of our Days in
Italy not its equal has: I say under otherwise equal Re-
lations. In thesame are with all Order of the Symmetries
and their Proportions many Columns up-set, likewise at the Dome
of Pisa; although they there from several Kinds to-another-joined
and thereby an Aggregate of Columns arisen, wherein man
understands, that they from different Regions there translated become
are. Likeway behaves it itself also after Some with
the before the Pantheon in Rome up-set. Although they from
great Mass are, so have they nevertheless not
their required Decency of the Height to their Bases and
Capitals, as it itself after the Judgement whose suit would,
who in the Art well experienced. Likewise says man equal-
measure of those of Sanct Peter and Sanct Paul outside the City.
But those, which after Art of Screws made before the Altar
of Sanct Peter attached, became from Jerusalem brought, out of
the Temple Solomon's taken: from them has the one the
immense Power against the evil Spirits: as I it several times
seen, through her holiest Touch, which our Redeemer
Jesus Christ undertook. From these exists no Norm, up
to that, what itself on their Height, Basis and Capital refers.
But not from Those Windings and Figures, because they according to
Pleasure of the Eye narrower and wider be can. The Same
say I of those, which themselves in Venice on the Sanct Marcus-
place find, which although they large and thick are, not the
required Symmetry keep, for if man well thereupon
attention pays, so strive they very in the Sharp and Pointed. But
I say to you quite open, that I in no Part of Italy ever
seen, nor believe, that today a after her Capital, Height
and Thickness better proportioned Column exist, off-seen there-
from, that she not on her own Basis, rather on an
inverted Capital stands, and the Eye with all her Beau-
ty corresponds, as she also, after my View, not made
become, in order at that Place to stand. This, my Dearest,
is here in the City Venice in the Convent of the Minorite-brothers,
our Monastery, la Gagrande named, where from the holy
Doctors in the second Monastery read to become uses, so that,
if you once there come, I know, that it you not
vex will, there-to-go, in order her to see, and at the same time
with your Thread and Instrument, as I in these Days with
some of my Pupils the Same done have.

1) seil. Columns,
