
Divina Proportio

A work necessary for all clear and inquiring minds;
where every student of Philosophy, Perspective, Painting,
Sculpture, Architecture, Music and other mathematical subjects
will find a pleasant, subtle and admirable learning
and will delight himself with various questions of the most holy science.

Under the review of the learned M. Ant. Capella,
printed at Venice by the honest man
Paganinum de Paganinis of Brescia 1509.

Sonnet of the Author.

Omnipotent nature has produced five bodies.

Which one fittingly designates as simple

For in every mixture they find themselves united

And join together in an orderly manner.

Created pure, unmixed and flawless

As Fire, Water, Heaven, Air and Earth

They gave origin to countless germs

According to Plato's opinion, and the first form.

But because nature is terrified of the void

According to Aristotle in Earth and Heaven

They cannot exist for themselves alone.

And no species meets our eye

But Plato's spirit and that of Euclid succeeded

To discover five sphere-like bodies

Of regular form and beautiful aspect

Of equal surfaces and of equal edges.

And yet a sixth can never arise.

FINIS.

The Bodies to the Reader.

The sweet, magnificent and so beloved fruit
Once forced the philosophers to investigate
Our origin, which nourishes insight.

Distich to the same.

To search for us drove the philosophers
Sweet gain, in which the spirit rejoices.

The Bodies speak.

You, who strive to explore the manifold reasons of things,
Learn, study from us. This path is open to all.

FINIS.

Names and Number of the Bodies.

Tetrahedron = regular three-
sided Pyramid.

1. Plane solid

2. "" hollow

3. Truncated solid

4. "" hollow

5. Elevated solid

Hexahedron or Cube
= Die.

7. Plane solid

8. "" hollow

9. Truncated solid

10. "" hollow

11. Elevated solid

12. Elevated hollow

13. Truncated elevated solid

14. "" "" hollow

Octahedron = Eight-faced.

15. Plane solid

16. "" hollow

17. Truncated solid

18. "" hollow

19. Elevated solid

20. "" hollow

Icosahedron = regular
20-faced.

21. Plane solid

22. "" hollow

23. Truncated solid

24. "" hollow

25. Elevated solid

26. "" hollow

Dodecahedron = regular
12-faced.

27. Plane solid

28. "" hollow

29. Truncated solid

30. "" hollow

31. Elevated solid

32. "" hollow

33. Truncated elevated solid

26-faced (equal-
edged).

35. Plane solid

36. "" hollow

37. Truncated elevated solid

38. "" "" hollow

39. 72-faced solid

40. 72- "" hollow

41. Triangular solid Column or

Body

42. "" hollow Column

(Prism)

43. "" solid Pyramid

44. "" hollow ""

45. Four-sided solid Column

46. "" hollow ""

47. "" solid Pyramid

48. "" hollow ""

49. Five-sided solid Column

50. "" hollow ""

51. "" solid Pyramid

52. "" hollow ""

53. Six-sided solid Column

54. "" hollow ""

55. Unequal-sided three-sided

solid Pyramid

56. Unequal-sided three-sided

hollow Pyramid

57. Round solid Column (Cylinder)

58. "" "" Pyramid (Cone)

59. Solid Sphere

60. Six-sided solid Pyramid

61. "" hollow

Reader, add the following words in Chapter L at the end
of the column, where I said "truncated" was not
said and these follow: "Possible that they produce a corporeal
angle and it is formed from that preceded in the third part
from each of its uniformly truncated
sides" etc., XIX, XX. Further:

"The elevated solid Octahedron" etc. Then follows the beginning
of the following column, where: "solid or void" erroneously
omitted. Further the following:

Namely: Surface is 24 + sqrt(69 1/2), and the content is
sqrt(8192). Set at the end of the fourth case of the third tractate

on sheet 22, where I said: "And this whole body is sqrt(40),
and the" etc., add: "The surface is 24" etc. and at the
end of case 4 follows the beginning of the following column:
"Reader" etc.

Content

of the present work and very useful Compendium
titled, "Of the divine proportion selected from the
mathematical disciplines. Composed by the Venerable Father
Professor of Sacred Theology M. Luca paciolo from the city
San Sepolchro, of the Order of Minorites and dedicated to the most
excellent and powerful Prince Ludwig Ma. Sfor, Anglo, Duke
of Milan, ornament of the divine heaven, and greatest
Patron of all learned and virtuous men.

In order to find more easily that which is contained in this book,
the reader will observe the following list,
wherein stands first the desired subject and afterwards the Chapter
number to which it belongs.

Letter to His Highness, Prince Lu. Ma. Sfor, Anglo,
Duke of Milan.

Cap. I. Praising mention of his magnificent court
and significance of the men of every rank who adorn it,
the most significant theologians and most deserving preachers of the
holy scripture of the seraphic Minorite order.

The famous Lord San Galeazzo San Severino, Captain General.

The most outstanding physicians and astronomers of His Ducal
Highness.

Significance of his praiseworthy Magistrate. Leonardo
Vinci from Florence.

Jacob Andreas from Ferrara. Height and size of his ad-
mirable and astonishing equestrian statue, and weight,
after the image of the burning desire of our Saviour
in the Temple of Grace has been mentioned with praise.

Golden honey-flowing words of His Ducal Highness concerning
the most holy science.

Habits and qualities of the Author of the present
writing, and of the other works composed by him.

Stimulus and cause which occasioned him to this work,
and why.

Recommendation and division of the present Compen-
dium and its content.

How without the knowledge of the mathematical disciplines
no good operation is possible. Admonition to His Highness and his
dear confidants and revering subordinates for the appropriation
of this. How false things are sometimes useful.

Cap. II. Preface to the present Treatise or Compen-
dium, named "of the divine proportion".

How from seeing knowledge began. Mention of the
mathematical bodies, and why the Author made them with his own hand
and presented them with the present Compendium to His Highness.

How the mathematical disciplines are foundation and ladder
to arrive at the knowledge of every other science.

How His Highness will be the occasion in his time
to revive the century with them. How under his
sublime rule righteousness will grow in his sub-
ordinates, who are always ready for its defense,
Archimedes of Syracuse defended the fatherland against the
attack of the Romans with machines and instruments by means of
mathematics.

Remembrance of Your blessed father, Duke Franz Sforza.

How neither the defense of states, nor perfection
in any military exercise is possible without the knowledge of Arith-
metic, Geometry and Proportion.

How all artillery, instruments and war machines
are made on the basis of mathematical disciplines. How all
ramparts, walls and fortresses, rocks, bridges and bastions
have been formed in similar manner by means of said disciplines.

How the old Romans were victorious in consequence of the zealous care of the engi-
neers.

Robert Valturri, a very experienced man from Rimini. Julius
Caesar threw the artful bridge across the Rhone.

Remembrance of Your blessed father, Duke Franz Sforza.
Very strong ropes of the industrious Tevere bridge.

Frederick of Feltre, his near relative, Most Illustrious
Duke of Urbino, surrounded his worthy palace of
massive stone with all war machines and
instruments, old and new.

John Scotus, the keenest theologian and most deserving
mathematician.

The works of art are all difficult because of ignorance
of mathematics.

Bartolo of Sassoferrato, an excellent jurist,
designed by means of mathematics the "Tiberina".

Lack of good astrologers, from lack of the said
mathematical knowledges.

Reason for the rarity of good mathematicians.

Distinguished Tuscan proverb of the mathematicians.

Plato did not want those who were not geometers.

Brief of Plato over the door of his Gymnasium against those
ignorant of mathematics.

Pythagoras sacrificed a hundred fat oxen to the gods for joy over the discovery of the
right angle.

In Milan, thanks to His Highness, the number of
good mathematicians grows daily in consequence of their diligent instruction, which
was recently introduced by His Highness.

The Author reads on all weekdays in Milan the said
mathematical disciplines, composing the present treatise
to the greatest favor and worthy profit of the distinguished listeners.

Cap. III. On the designation and meaning of the
name: "Mathematic."

Which and how many sciences and mathematical
subjects there are.

How Perspective is for just as many reasons as Music
one of the mathematical disciplines.

How of the mathematical subjects there are three, or exactly five.

Recommendation of Perspective.

The highly deserving painters Zeuxis and Parosasius.

How painting deceives both kinds of creatures, the reason-
able as well as the unreasonable.

Of the things which the reader has to observe for the understanding
of this book.

Cap. IV. What is to be understood, when of the first
or second, of Case 1 or 3 or others is spoken.

Of the mathematical abbreviations and characters.

Of the synonyms, i.e. different designations
of the same object in mathematics. What one understands
by power and square of a number.

Cap. V. On the suitable title of this treatise on the
Divine Proportion.

On the five essential agreements of the said
proportion with the divine epithets.

How the fifth substance gives existence to the four simple bodies, and
by means of these to all others, so also this pro-
portion to the five regular bodies and through them to countless
others.

How the forms of the said five regular bodies
have been ascribed to the five simple bodies.

Cap. VI. Of the most worthy recommendation of this holy
and divine proportion.

How without the knowledge of said proportion many
things most worthy of admiration can be attained neither in philosophy
nor in any other science.

Cap. VII. Of the first effect of a line divided according to the said
divine proportion.

How one has to understand and interpret the said
relationship among magnitudes.

How the wisest used to call said proportion in their
books.

What one understands by division of a magnitude according to the said
proportion.

How among three expressions of the same kind necessarily
two proportions or ratios similar or dissimilar among themselves
are found.

How this proportion between three expressions is found in a
certain way always unchangeable.

How the other proportions, continuous or discontinuous,
can vary in infinitely many ways among three homogenous magnitudes.

How this proportion does not degrade all the others,
but rather makes them even more significant, together with their defini-
tions.

That this proportion in its smallest outer and
middle part can never be rational and never be expressed by a rational
number.

Cap. VIII. What one understands by dividing a magnitude according to the
proportion that has a mean and two extreme
segments.

How usually the remainders arise and what one
understands by them.

Cap. IX. What the root of a number or any
arbitrary other magnitude be. What rational and irrational
magnitudes be.

Cap. X. Consequence of the first effect.

How in the whole course of this book Euclid is always pre-
supposed.

Cap. XI. Of the second essential effect of this
proportion.

Cap. XII. Of its third special effect.

Cap. XIII. Of its fourth inexpressible effect.

Cap. XIV. Of its fifth wonderful effect.

Cap. XV. Of its sixth unnamable effect.

How no rational magnitude can be divided according to this proportion in such
a way that the parts are rational.

Cap. XVI. Of its seventh incredible effect.

How the hexagon and decagon together form a magnitude
which is divided according to this proportion.

Cap. XVII. Of the eighth reverse effect of the
previous.

Cap. XVIII. Of its ninth effect surpassing the others.

What one understands by chords of the pentagon angle.
Why the two adjacent chords in the pentad always
intersect each other according to this proportion. Why neces-
sarily always the one segment of said chords be equal
to the side of the same pentagon.

Cap. XIX. On its tenth highest effect.

How all the effects and conditions of a magnitude
divided according to this proportion correspond to all effects and con-
ditions of every other so divided magnitude.

Cap. XX. Of its eleventh distinguished effect.

How from the division of the hexagon side according to this pro-
portion the side of the equilateral decagon results.

Cap. XXI. Of its twelfth almost incomprehensible effect.

What general and connected roots be.

Cap. XXII. Of its thirteenth most important effect.

How without the knowledge of this proportion the formation
of a regular pentagon is impossible.

How Euclid and his proofs always apply only the preced-
ing and not the following.

Cap. XXIII. How out of reverence for our Saviour the
said effects conclude here, of which many more are yet
to be found.

Special piety of His Highness. More open recommendation
of the image of the burning desire of our Saviour. Leonardo
Vinci from Florence.

Cap. XXIV. How the said effects contribute to the com-
position of all regular and dependent bodies.
Why these five bodies are called regular.

Cap. XXV. That it is impossible that there be in nature
more than five regular bodies, and why?

That it is impossible to form a regular body from the
hexagon, heptagon, octagon,
nonagon, decagon and other similar ones.

Cap. XXVI. Of the production of the five regular
bodies and of the ratio of each to the sphere diameter:
and indeed first of the Tetrahedron or regular three-sided
four-faced body, the form of fire according to the Platonists.

Cap. XXVII. Of the formation of the body called Hexahedron or Cube
and its ratio to the sphere, figure of the
Earth according to the Platonists.

Cap. XXVIII. How one produces the Octahedron to be fitted exactly
into a sphere, figure of the Air, according to the Platonists,
and on its ratio to the sphere.

Cap. XXIX. Of the construction and production of the body called Ico-
sahedron, form of Water according to the Pla-
tonists and designation of its sides.

Proof that the sphere surrounds it exactly.

Cap. XXX. Of the manner of procedure to produce the noblest
regular body, called Dodecahedron also body of 12 pentagons,
according to the Platonists the form
of the fifth substance and of the designation of its sides.
Proof why the sphere surrounds it exactly.

Cap. XXXI. Rule and method to find by means of the sphere diameter
known to us all sides of the said five regular
bodies. Order and way how the said
bodies differ among themselves in sides and construction.

Cap. XXXII. Of the ratio of the said regular
and of the bodies dependent on them to one another.

That their ratios to one another are partly rational,
partly irrational.

Cap. XXXIII. Of the ratio of all their surfaces to
one another.

Cap. XXXIV. Of the inscribing of the five regular
bodies into one another and how many kinds thereof in
total are possible, and why.

Cap. XXXV. How the Tetrahedron is formed from the Cube
and allows itself to be placed therein so that the corners exactly
fall upon one another.

Cap. XXXVI. Of the exact enclosing of the Octa-
hedron by the Cube.

Cap. XXXVII. How the Hexahedron is introduced into the Octahedron.

Cap. XXXVIII. Of the inscription of the Tetrahedron into the
Octahedron.

Cap. XXXIX. How into the Icosahedron exactly the body called Dodecahedron
is placed.

Cap. XL. Of the setting of the Icosahedron into the Dodecahedron.

Cap. XLI. Of the setting of the Cube into the Dodecahedron.

Cap. XLII. How to fit the Octahedron into the Dodecahedron.

Cap. XLIII. Of the inclusion of the Tetrahedron in the Dodecahedron.

Cap. XLIV. Setting of the Cube into the Icosahedron.

Cap. XLV. Manner to form the Tetrahedron in the Icosahedron.

Cap. XLVI. Reason why of the said inscriptions
there cannot be more.

Cap. XLVII. Procedure to be able to produce in each of the five said
regular bodies the most regular body, namely the
sphere.

Cap. XLVIII. Of the form and arrangement of the plane
solid or hollow, and of the truncated plane solid or
hollow, and of the elevated solid or hollow Tetrahedron.

Cap. XLIX. Of the nature of the plane solid and
hollow, of the truncated plane solid or hollow, and of the
elevated solid or hollow Hexahedron.

Cap. L. Of the arrangement of the plane solid or hollow,
of the truncated solid or hollow and of the elevated solid
or hollow Octahedron.

Cap. LI. Description of the plane, truncated and
elevated solid or void Icosahedron.

Cap. LII. Properties and form of the plane, trun-
cated and elevated solid or void Dodecahedron, its
origin and the bodies dependent on it.

Cap. LIII. Form and origin of the plane, truncated
and elevated solid or void 26-faced body.

Cap. LIV. How the 72-faced body arises. How the
architects frequently make use of this form in their buildings.

That many moderns are abusively called architects,
who in consequence of their ignorance deviate from the old authors,
especially Vitruvius.

Ducal motive of His Highness for the shaming of the ig-
norant.

Great joy of Pythagoras when he found the ratio of the
two sides which enclose the right angle.

Cap. LV. On the way to be able to form besides the aforesaid several
material bodies, and how their forms continue into the
infinite.

For what reason Plato ascribed the forms of the five regular
bodies to the five simple materials, namely Earth,
Water, Air, Fire, Heaven. Calcidius, Apuleius,
Alcinous and Macrobius.

That the sphere is not to be excluded from regularity,
although in it there are no sides and angles.

Cap. LVI. Of the spherical body, its formation.

Cap. LVII. How all five regular
bodies allow themselves to be inscribed in the sphere.

How the mason would have to make the said
regular bodies from stone or other material.

Honorable and scientific consolation and argument against
false boasters.

Different appearance of two equal straight lines placed before the eyes,
in their length.

Case of the Author in Rome, to please the Most Illustrious Count
Hieronymus of blessed memory in the presence of
Master Melozzo, the painter, at the building of his palace.

Exemplary evidence against said false braggarts;
of Hiero and the poet Simonides.

Cap. LVIII. Of the oblong bodies, i.e. which are longer
or higher than broad, like columns and their pyramids.

Of the two main column types in general.

What angular and round columns are.

Cap. LIX. Of the columns with three-sided basis.

What a bar-shaped body be.

Cap. LX. Of the columns with four-sided basis.

To the diversity of their equal base surfaces correspond
the principal regular four-sided figures, namely
square, elongated rectangle, Elmuhaym and other Elmu-
ariffe [Rhombus and Rhomboid] or irregular equal- or unequal-sided figures.

Cap. LXI. Of the five-sided columns, i.e. of five
side surfaces, be they equal- or unequal-sided.

How the types of columns, like the straight-lined figures
of their base surfaces, can multiply into the infinite.

Cap. LXII. Of the way to measure all columns, and first
of the round ones, with examples.

Why for the quadrature of the circle one takes 11/14 of the
square of its diameter.

Cap. LXIII. Of the way to measure all types of angular columns
and examples thereof.

Cap. LXIV. Of the pyramids and all their differ-
ences. What a round pyramid be.

Cap. LXV. Of the angular pyramids and their diver-
sities.

How the types of angular pyramids can continue into the
infinite, just like their columns. What abbreviated
or truncated pyramids be.

Cap. LXVI. Of the way and procedure to be able to measure
every pyramid. How every pyramid be 1/3 of its cylinder
or of its column.

Cap. LXVII. How from the angular ones results evidently
that each be 1/3 of its column.

How all angular columns let themselves be resolved into as many bar-shaped bodies
as their base surfaces decompose into triangles.

Cap. LXVIII. Of the way to calculate all types of abbreviated, round
and all kinds of angular pyramids.

Cap. LXIX. Of the measurement of all other regular
bodies and those dependent on them.

Confidence in the versed geniuses, but especially
in that of His Ducal Highness. With worthy recommendation and
true praise of the distinguished serious and pious senti-
ments of His Ducal Highness.

How His Ducal Highness in no less fitting
manner built the Temple of Grace in Milan, as Octavian in
Rome the Temple of Peace.

How he would be convicted of no less envy and ill-will against
His Ducal Highness, who gave out the said
praises for flattery, than the author of this
flattery himself.
