Ludwig Maria Sforza Anglo, Duke of Milan, Ornament of
Peace as of War, by Brother Luca Pacioli from Borgo
San Sepolchro, of the Order of Minorites, Professor of Sacred
Theology.

In the year of our Salvation 1498, Exalted Duke, on the ninth
day of February as I was introduced into the laudable scientific contest
in the impregnable castle of Your
famous city Milan, worthiest place of Your accustomed
Residence, in the presence of You, accompanied by many
very famous and wise men, clergy as well as laity,
of which Your brilliant court always has abundance. Among
whose number were found besides the High Reverend Lord-
ships of Bishops, Protonotaries and Abbots of our
holy seraphic Order, the Reverend Father and fa-
mous Theologian Magister Gometius, the High Reverend Preacher
of the Holy Scripture, Frater Domenico, with the surname Ponzone:
the Most Reverend Frater, Magister Francesco Busti, present
deputy Superintendent in our worthy Monastery of
Milan. And of laity first my special protector,
the famous S. Galeazzo Sforza VI., S. Severino the very brave
and Captain General of Your Ducal Highness, who in arms
today yields to no one, and zealous imitator of our
teachings. Then of extraordinary orators of most excellent
faculties and of highest of Medicine and Astronomy the
famous and very keen de Serapione and Avicenna and the
explorer of the higher bodies and interpreter of the future Am-
brogio Rosa, the very learned healer of all diseases, Aluisi
Marliano, and Gabriel Pirovano, the very careful observer of
medicine in every direction. And the by the aforementioned
in all aforementioned subjects much admired and hon-
ored Nicolo Cusano, with the in the same sciences
very versed Andrea of Novara. And other dis-
tinguished very experienced Doctors of both laws and
Councilors, Secretaries and Chancellors of Your praiseworthy
Magistrate in association with the keenest Architects
and Engineers and diligent inventors of new things,
Leonardo da Vinci, our Florentine countryman,
who in sculpture, cast and painting justifies his surname
against everyone, as in the admira-
ble and astonishing equestrian statue, whose height from
vertex to earth amounts to 12 ells, i.e. 3 1/7 times as much
as the length of the line ab; and whose whole
bronze mass amounts to circa 200,000 pounds, whereby
of each the usual ounce makes 1/12, which
dedicated to the memory of Your blessed unconquered father,
is far removed from jealousy against that of Phi-
dias and Praxiteles on Monte Cavallo, together with the
pretty image of the burning desire of our Salvation
in the worthy, devout place of bodily and
spiritual recreation of the holy Temple of Grace,
painted by his hand. That today Apelles,
Myron, Polyclitus and the others must yield to him,
these make clear. And not enough with these he seeks, on the
inestimable work on local motion, impact and weight,
as of all forces, i.e. accidental weights (having
already finished with all diligence the book on painting and
human movements), to bring the same with all
zeal to due conclusion. Then
Jacob Andreas of Ferrara, like a brother to him, keen-
est explorer of the works of Vitruvius, who nevertheless
in his special military subject is in no thing
less versed. With Your golden and honey-
flowing words You said, it be of the greatest
recommendation before God and the world, for him who endowed with
any ability, to gladly communicate it to others.
From which first comes love, and praise and honor for him,
as he follows the holy saying: "What I learned without dis-
simulation, I gladly communicate without envy."

Of those lovely words I have taken the sense so firmly into
spirit, as it was never more lastingly written in marble.
And although initially almost by nature the same
was inborn in me as in everyone, especially to apply those abilities
with which it pleased the Highest in his infinite goodness
to endow me before others, namely with those for the
most necessary sciences and worthiest mathematical
doctrines, so I languish nevertheless already in consequence of the toil-
some daily, as nightly bodily and spiritual
exertions, which becomes clear to everyone who knows with care our great work
on similar disciplines and objects, composed, and dedicated to the
magnanimous relative of Your Highness, Duke of Urbino
Guido Ubaldo, as well as the remaining works, which in the
fifth section of this are cited. I
had already intended to spend the years with others in free air,
but powerfully stimulated by those (sciences),
I drew at the lonely beach, from New Athens for
spice of all other works composed by us on similar subjects
both to the highest and delightful taste
in all aforementioned sciences and mathematical
disciplines of Your Ducal Highness, as also to the benefit
of Your subordinates honoring You, for the ornament also and
perfect decoration of Your worthiest library adorned with a countless multitude
of volumes from every science and doctrine,
to draft this short and very useful treatise called of the divine
proportion. The same will together with
all their material figures of the bodies, which are contained in the said,
grant the one who observes them no less admira-
tion, than all the other volumes with their other very
worthy things do, which are deposited there, because said
forms have been hidden to the living until now.

We will speak in the same of high and sublime
things, which in deed are the test and the measure
for all aforementioned sciences and disciplines, and
from them stems every other speculative, scientific, prac-
tical and mechanical operation. Without their knowledge and
presupposition it is not possible to be able to execute well
any of human things as shows itself. Therefore
With prudent insight Your Ducal Highness will admonish Your con-
fidants and other subordinates honoring You
to discuss that for joy as for highest pleasure, for most use-
ful gain, insofar as these are no old wives'
tale, nor other laughable and false antics, nor also
lying and unbelievable poetic inventions,
which feed the ears only with a haze. Apart from
that false things, according to the Philosopher, are useful through the
knowledge of the true ones which follow from them,
as the inversion of the right is an opposite of that. And
then the true things will be all the more useful and
advantageous to us, because from them only true proceeds. Among
the true ones however, as Aristotle and Averroes assure,
our mathematical ones are truest and of the first degree of
certainty, and them follow all others relating to nature.
Therefore for introduction and justification of the here
following let this be enough: and therefore, Exalted Duke, it is clear
that all other sciences are only opinions and
only these can be called certainties. As it happens
among the physicians Avicenna, Galenus, Hippocrates and the
Others, that the One asserts, the life of the
human sticks in the heart, and Others, it be in the brain, Others,
in the blood, while they brought forward reasons and arguments enough for their con-
firmation, so that it is never good to leave true things for
doubtful ones, insofar as these are called vain by the wise.
Therefore the verse: One must not leave the true
for the sake of the vain in the lurch.

Always in humility and due respect of Your Ducal
Highness, to whom I recommend myself most urgently a-
new. Farewell, according to wish.
