Cap. II.

Preface of the Venerable Father Magister Luca Pacioli from
Borgo San Sepolchro of the Order of Minorites, and Professor
of Sacred Theology to the Compendium on the Divine
Proportion from the mathematical sciences.

"From WONDER one began to philosophize", that
says, Exalted Duke, the cited quotation of the master
of those who know, that from seeing knowledge takes its
beginning, just as he assures the same in another place,
saying: that nothing exists in the intellect before it was
present in the sensation. That means, that no thing
attains understanding before it has revealed itself previously in some way
to the senses. And of our senses, so it is
concluded by the wise, seeing is the most noble.
Therefore it is not without reason commonly said that the eye
is the first gate through which the intellect perceives and
tastes, as it is contained in that passage, that as the Egyptian
priests stood very astonished at the sight of the lunar eclipse,
and sought for the reason, they found through real science
that this happens naturally, through the inter-
position of the earth between sun and moon, with which they
were satisfied. And from there gradually searching more sharply with the light
of the five windows of the spirit, their successors filled
to our benefit with their deep knowledge a countless
number of books. For as one thought springs from another,
so went forth from that one afterwards many others.
Consulting with myself about this, I decided
to seize the pen for this very useful Compendium selected from the mathematical
sciences, and
at the same time to produce exactly with my own hand materially for the general benefit
their bodies in the form proper to them,
and to present them with the present Compendium to Your Ducal
Highness. At their unaccustomed sight, like
something that came to our times from Heaven, I do not
doubt that Your keen and astute insight will have very
great pleasure in it, especially if You will find by means of the afore-
mentioned light, with no less zeal for research than the
old Egyptian priests on the occasion of the said lunar eclipse,
causes and intimate harmony of those forms with the help
and instruction of the presented treatise. Therefore
I am certain that, if already in the past to him who
prophesied only in a part of those aforesaid sciences and
disciplines, the same presented itself rich and productive,
in the future they will shape themselves much more magnificently and richly,
and that all the more with all diligent care Your dear
confidants and honoring subordinates and other well-
disposed are to be admonished to the appropriation of the same, insofar as the
said mathematical sciences are foundation and ladder
to arrive at the knowledge of every other science,
insofar as they are of the first degree of certainty, as the
Philosopher assures, saying the following:

"The sciences designated as mathematical are
of the first degree of certainty, and the natural sciences follow
them." The mathematical sciences and disciplines are, as said,
of the first degree of certainty, and them
follow all natural sciences. And without their knowledge it is
impossible to understand well any other science,
and in Wisdom it is also written: "Because Everything
consists of Number, Weight and Measure," i.e. that Everything which
divides itself as Fourth in the higher or lower universe, must neces-
sarily be subordinate to Number, Weight and Measure.
And regarding these three things Aurelius Augustine said
In his book: Of the City of God, The greatest artist is
praised most highly insofar as he let in them "Something arise,
which was not present before". In consequence of Your amiable
admonition I understand that Many unknown with the use
of such magnificent gain, must wake up from sleep and
spiritual dream and seek with all zeal and care
to appropriate those entirely to themselves, and it will be occasion,
that in them the century of its time arises anew and that they
must arrive more realistically and rapidly in all their studies of any
science at perfection. And besides the
good reputation and worthy recommendation of Your Ducal Highness,
righteousness will not increase a little under Your sublime rule
among Your dear confidants and beloved subordinates,
who always quite ready for the defense of the same,
have done no less than the famous and inventive Geometer
and deserving Architect Archimedes for his father city,
who (as reported) with his new and mani-
fold inventions of machines preserved unharmed for a long time the
city Syracuse against the rule and warlike success
of the Romans so long, until the same sought to storm it openly
through Marcus Marcellus. And from daily experience
it is not hidden to Your Ducal Highness
(since already for many years of Your famous father's
memory, whole Italy and both Gauls, the Transalpine
and Cisalpine, have been therein Author, Teacher and Guide),
that the defense of large and small states,
called with another name Art of War, cannot be exercised honorably
and usefully without the knowledge of Geometry, Arithmetic and Proportion in
particular. And never
can finally a good army, which is sent out for attack or for
defense, call itself well provided with everything,
if there is not coordinated with it engineers and a special constructor
of new machines, as we have mentioned shortly before of the
great Geometer Archimedes of Syracuse. If
one considers well generally all his artillery devices, take
what one will, like bastions and other ramparts, bombards,
throwing machines, sling apparatuses, stone slings, Rohonfe,
ballistas, catapults, rams, turtles, wall breakers, cats,
with all other countless machines, apparatuses and instru-
ments, so they will always be found built and arranged according to numbers, measure and their
ratios. What else are
rocks, towers, ravelins, walls, counter-walls, trenches,
great towers, battlements, mantlets and other fortification works
in the country, in cities and castles, than entirely Geometry
and Proportions, weighed and directed with the water levels and
plumbs necessary thereto? Through nothing else were the
old Romans so victorious, as Vegetius, Frontinus and other ex-
cellent writers write, than through the great care and
diligent preparation of engineers and otherwise admirals
on land and on water, who without the mathematical
disciplines, i.e. Arithmetic, Geometry and Proportions, im-
possible satisfy, what the old histories of Livy, Diony-
sius, Pliny and others make clear and distinct. Among them
is Roberto Valturio, the very experienced man from Rimini, he who
treated all of them in his valuable work, titled of the war instruments
and dedicated to the Illustrious Lord Sigismund Pandolfo.
And of said machines and in-
struments the said man from Rimini gives e.g. in his book
drawings and of yet many more others.

Your Highness' closely connected relative Frederick of Feltre
of blessed memory, most illustrious Duke of Urbino, had
surrounded all around from the foot the whole astonishing building of his
noble and admirable palace in Urbino with an
enclosure of massive and beautiful stone by the hand of most wor-
thy stonemasons and sculptors regularly. Just as
one also reads among others in Julius Caesar in his Commen-
taries about the artful bridge. As further up to the
present day in the worthy city of Todi in Umbria in
the church of Saint Fortunatus [there hang] open
a large quantity of very thick ropes from our holy monastery of
Your blessed father's memory, which he regularly arranged for a
bridge over the Tiber at his famous obtained victory.
Also through no other means did our
very keen Scotus come to the great speculations of
sacred Theology, than through the knowledge of the mathematical
disciplines, as is clear from all his holy works. Es-
pecially if one observes well the investigation of his second
book on the opinions, when he inquiringly asks whether the angel
has his own and determined place of residence for his existence,
wherein he well shows that he has understood the whole magnificent book
of our keenest Megarian philosopher Euclid. By nothing else
show themselves likewise all texts of the Prinst of those, who understand Physics, higher Metaphysics
and also the rest difficult, than through the ignorance
of the already mentioned disciplines. Through nothing else is
lack of good Astronomers than in consequence of the lack of Arith-
metic, Geometry, Proportions and Proportionality. And of
ten nine direct themselves in their judgments according to tables, pocket-
books and other things, which are calculated by Ptolemy, Albumasar,
Alfraganus, Gebe, Alfonso, Bianchini, Prodocino and Others,
which in consequence of the little circumspection of their scribes
can be defective or deteriorated. And if they
in consequence of that rely on those, they fall into the greatest
and most evident errors, to no small damage and pre-
judice of those who rely on them. The extreme sharpness
of all municipal laws consists, according to the explanations made to me repeatedly by
experts, in the
judgment of the water alluvions and washings of the
waters in consequence of their excessive flooding, as about
them their most significant head, Bartolo of Sassoferrato, has composed
a special treatise and titled Tiberina, has developed in his pre-
face much Geometry and Arithmetic, asserting
to have learned them likewise from one of our Brothers named
Guido, And Professor of sacred Theology from that treatise
of Giving and Taking, what the Tiber sometimes does by
his floods; especially in those
regions situated towards Perugia the water flood is con-
tained. Thereby he has always directed himself with geometric straight-lined and
curved figures, step by step following our very keen
Philosopher Euclid, and
led the same with great care to conclusion. I speak
not of the sweet, musical harmony, nor of the
highest ornament and spiritual elevation of Perspective, and of the
careful arrangement of Architecture, the description of the
sea and land universe, and the doctrine of the bodies and
celestial phenomena, insofar as about that, what has been said until now,
appears clear. I leave to less surfeit of the
reader other very practical and speculative sciences
aside with all other mechanical arts more necessary for human conditions,
regarding which without
a judgment about these their attainment and the observation of the
appropriate order in the same is impossible. And it is
therefore not to be wondered, if there are in our times few
good mathematicians, because the rarity of good teachers is guilty
of it, together with the abyss of sleep, and idle
feathers, and partly the weakness of the modern spirits.

Therefore it has become customary among the learned according to common proverb
to say: "The gold is tested by
fire, and the spirit by mathematics", that is,
the genuineness of the gold the fire shows and the versed-
ness of the spirit the mathematical disciplines, which according to the
content wants to say, that good insight in the mathe-
matical subjects makes very suited to any other,
that they be of great abstraction and subtlety, because it
always is valid to consider without tangible matter. And they are
it in deed, which, as one is wont to say according to a Tuscan proverb,
split the hair in the air. Therefore the old divine philosopher Plato refused
not unjustly access to his famous Gymnasium to those not experienced in Geo-
metry, as he had a shield with large distinct writing attached at the top of his main
portal
of the following wording: "Here may no one ignorant of Geometry
enter," i.e. whoever were not a good Geometer,
should not enter there. That he did, because hidden in it
every other science is found again. Of its pleasant
sweetness, was before him, the most careful nature researcher, Pytha-
goras, filled with great joy and jubilation by the discovery of the right angle,
as one reads of him, and Vitruvius
relates, who brought a hundred bulls as sacrifice to the gods, as
will be mentioned below. And this serve for the present to the
mathematical sciences as recommendation, whose number
in this Your famous city begins to grow not a little daily thanks to Your Ducal
Highness favor in consequence
of the diligent public lectures recently introduced by You
for the benefit for the distinguished listeners, to whom I,
there according to the grace granted me by the Highest in these,
explain clearly and with all care (according to their judgment) the su-
blime volume of the pre-thought Euclid in the sciences of
Arithmetic, Geometry, Proportions and Proportionalities.
And already I have come with ten of his books to the
most worthy conclusion, applying always to his
theory still our practice for greater benefit and full
understanding of that, and for the present execution of this work
the rest of the time.
