Cap. III.

(Finished the preface follows to clarify what by this name Mathematico is to be understood.)

This word, Exalted Duke, is derived from the Greek, which in our language sounds as much as to say disciplinable [teachable/learnable], and for our purpose by mathematical sciences and disciplines are understood Arithmetic, Geometry, Astrology [Astronomy], Music, Perspective, Architecture, and Cosmography, and whatever other [science] dependent on these. Nevertheless commonly by the wise the four first are taken, that is Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Music, and the others are called subalternate, that is dependent on these four. So want Plato and Aristotle and Isidore in his Etymologies. And Severinus Boethius in your Arithmetic. But our judgment although it be imbecile and low constrains us to either three or five. That is Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy excluding Music from said [list] for as many reasons as they [exclude] Perspective from the 5. And Perspective for as many reasons adding that to said four as those [add] Music to our said 3. If these say music contents the hearing one of the natural senses. And that [Perspective contents] the seeing. Which is much more worthy as it is the first door to the intellect, if they say that [Music] attends to the sonorous number and to the measure imported in the time of its prolations. And that [Perspective attends] to the natural number according to its every definition and to the measure of the visual line. If that recreates the mind by harmony. And this by due distance and variety of colors delights much. If that considers its harmonic proportions. And this the arithmetic and geometric ones. And briefly Exalted Duke until now and already for several years this battles in my head. And from no one is this made clear to me why more four than three or five. Yet I judge so many wise men not to err. And for their sayings my ignorance is not plucked out. Alas, who is he that seeing a graceful figure well disposed with its due lineaments, to which only breath seems to involve lacking, does not judge it a thing sooner divine than human? And painting imitates nature as much as a thing can be said. Which appears evidently to our eyes in the tasted image of the ardent desire of our salvation, in which it is not possible to imagine the apostles with greater life at the sound of the voice of the infallible truth when he said: unus vestrum me traditurus est [one of you will betray me]. Where with acts and gestures one to another and the other to one with live and afflicted admiration seem to speak so worthily with his graceful hand our Lionardo disposed it. As of Zeuxis and Parrhasius is read in Pliny on paintings that being in contest of the same exercise with Parrhasius challenging each other with the brush: the former made a basket of grapes with its vine leaves inserted and placed in public, the birds won as they had to throw themselves at it. And the other made a veil, then Zeuxis said to Parrhasius having also placed it in public and believing it was a veil that covered his work made in contest: lift away the veil and let everyone see yours as was mine and so he remained vanished. Because if he [deceived] the birds irrational animals and that one a rational [man] and master deceived himself perhaps the great delight and the highest love for that (although ignorant of it) does not deceive me. And universally he is not a gentle spirit whom painting does not delight. When also the one and the other animal rational and irrational implies to itself. Wherefore with this I will remain if other does not come that there be three principal and the others subalternate or five if those count music and for nothing does it seem to me perspective is to be put behind since it is not worthy of less praise. And I am certain for not being an article of faith it will be tolerated in me. And this as much as pertains to said name.
