Cap. IV.

Of the things which the reader has to observe for the understanding of this work.

Afterwards is to be noted to less inconvenience in the following,
that, if sometimes will be cited: the first of the
first, the fourth of the second, the tenth of the fifth, the
twentieth of the sixth and so continuously up to the fifteenth,
one has to understand by the first number always the number of the conclusions.
And by the second number indication the
number of the books of our philosopher Euclid, whom we gen-
erally imitate as Archimandrite of these subjects. Namely,
if one says: according to the fifth of the first, so that wants to say:
"according to the fifth conclusion of his first book" and
likewise regarding the other individual books of his entire
work on the elements and first principles of Arithmetic
and Geometry. If however the authority cited by us
belongs to another of his works, or to another writer,
so we will name that, or him.
Further regarding many different characters and ab-
breviations, which are wont to be used in similar subjects.
So medicine uses its own for scruple, ounce, drachm
and grain, the silversmiths and jewelers for grain, denarius and
carat, the astrologers theirs for Jupiter, Mercury, Saturn, Sun,
Moon, and the Others likewise theirs, and the merchants
for Lire, Soldi, Groschen and Pfennige likewise different ones for the sake of
abbreviation, and this only to avoid prolixity of
writing as well as of reading, because they
would fill much paper with ink by other procedure. In
similar manner we too use in mathematics regarding
algebra namely in the practical-speculative others, which
designate: Thing, Census [Square] and Cube, and the remaining expres-
sions as they are contained in our aforementioned work.
Of their number we will also use some in this treatise,
and indeed it is those which we have put together in the table be-
fore. In similar manner signify the following
names: Multiplication, rectangular Product, one and the
same thing. And likewise are these: namely Square of a
magnitude and Power of a magnitude one and the same, for the
Power of the line refers to its Square according to the last
of the first. And further, what "the line can", is its Square.
And these things must sometimes be observed in our progress,
in order not to err in the sense of the words.
