Cap. V.

Of the suitable title of the present treatise.

It seems to me regarding our treatise, Exalted
Duke, the title corresponding to it must read: "On the
Divine Proportion". And that for many similar properties,
which I find in our proportion, at which we aim in this
very useful discourse, which belong to God himself,
of which we will emphasize among others four, to suffice our
statement: The first is, that it is only alone there
and not more; and it is not possible to generate other species nor
deviations from it, which unity according to theo-
logical as well as philosophical doctrine is the highest
epithet of God himself. The second property is that of the
Holy Trinity, i.e. as in the Divine one and the same
substance exists between three persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
likewise one and the same proportion of this kind must
always take place between three terms, and can never
be found either with more or with less (terms),
which will be discussed. The third property is, that,
as God actually cannot be defined nor made under-
standable to us through words, just as little this our pro-
portion can be determined by an understandable number nor
expressed by any rational magnitude, but always
remains hidden and secret, and is therefore called by the mathematicians
irrational. The fourth property is, that just
as God can never change, and is All in All, and
All in every of his parts, so (is) this our present pro-
portion always in every continuous and discrete magnitude;
may the same (parts) be large or small, one and the
same and always remains unchangeable, and in no way can
change itself, nor also be grasped with the intellect in other way,
as our progress will show. The
fifth property can not unjustly be added to the afore-
mentioned, namely: as God confers existence to the
heavenly virtue, called with other names fifth substance,
and by means of this to the other four simple
bodies, namely to the four elements Earth, Water,
Air and Fire, and by means of these existence to every other
thing in nature, so gives this our holy proportion (accord-
ing to the old Plato in his Timaeus) to Heaven itself the
formal existence, by attributing to it the form of the body called Dodecahedron,
otherwise called body of 12 pentagons,
which, as will show itself further below, can impossible be formed without our
proportion. And similarly
it assigns to each of the other elements its peculiar
form, which among themselves in no way coincide: name-
ly to the Fire the pyramidal form, called Tetrahedron,
to the Earth the cubic form called Hexahedron, to the Air the
figure called Octahedron, to the Water the Icosahedron called.
And these forms and figures are called by all learned regular
bodies, as further below will be discussed with each individually.
And then by means of these infinitely
many other bodies called dependent. These 5 regular
bodies can impossible be proportioned among themselves,
nor understood, that they be circumscribable by the sphere
without our said proportion. Which further below Everything
will become clear. These properties, although many others of them
could still be cited, may be cited sufficiently regarding
the appropriate naming of the present Compendium.
