Cap. VII.

Of the first effect of a line divided according to our proportion.

If a line is divided according to the proportion, which has a
mean and two extreme segments (for so with other
designation our aforementioned proportion has been called by the learned),
and one adds to its greater segment the half
of the whole line, which was so proportionally divided,
so will with necessity follow, that the square
of their sum always amounts to the fivefold, i.e. five times as much as the
square of the said full half.

Before proceeding further, is to be explained, how one
has to understand and insert the said proportion among magnitudes,
and how it has been called by the wisest in their books.
Therefore I say, that it is called:
Proportion which has a mean and two extreme segments,
which is a special property of every trisection. For
every arbitrarily given trisection will always have a mean
with its two extreme segments, because the mean is never
understood without those. And in this way is taught in the
19th of the sixth, to divide a magnitude so, after
previously in the third definition of the sixth described, what
one has to understand by such division. Although he
(Euclid) in his second through the eleventh shows, to divide the line on
ground of the same virtue and force, whereby he does not
name the proportion differently earlier, than he exceeded the fifth.
And by Campanus it was mentioned among numbers in
the 16th of the ninth. This is it, what concerns its naming.

(How one has to understand its mean and its extreme segments.)

After understood, how our proportion is designated with its
special name, remains to be explained, how the said
mean and also the extreme segments are to be understood in any arbitrary
magnitude and how they must be constituted,
in order to find in them the said divine proportion. For
this purpose one must know, as is stated in the fifth book,
that always between three terms of one and the
same kind necessarily two relationships, or we
will say, proportions take place, namely one between
the first and second, the other between the second and
third term. For example: Let there be three magnitudes of the
same kind (since one does not understand otherwise, that among
them proportion takes place); the first a be according to number =
nine, the second b be = six, the third c be = four. I
assert that among them two ratios take place the one
from: a to b, i.e. from nine to six, which we for usually
in our work call sexquialtera and takes place, when the
greater term contains the smaller one and a half times, for
nine contains six and still three, which makes the half of six,
and therefore it is called sexquialtera. But because we
here do not intend to speak of proportions in general,
because we have treated sufficiently extensively regarding them
and explained them together with the proportionalities in our afore-
mentioned work, so I do not care here,
to spread myself otherwise about them, but always one has
to presuppose all that, which is said in general about them, with
their definitions and divisions. And to
this one alone refers our present speech, since it is not
found, that about it with such and so useful pro-
cedure has been treated by anyone before. But to come back to the
begun sentence with the three magnitudes, so
there takes place from the second b to the third c, i.e. from 6 : 4
another ratio likewise sexquialtera. About these,
be they equal or unequal, we do not care at present,
but the intention is only, to explain, how among
three magnitudes of the same kind necessarily two ratios
have to be found. Likewise I say, that our divine
fulfills the same conditions, i.e., that among its
three members, namely mean and two extreme segments
it contains unchangeably two ratios of always the same naming,
which also with the others, be they continuous or discontinuous,
and indeed in infinitely many different ways can take place.
For it will be among its three members sometimes double,
sometimes triple and so with the others, if one
runs through all usual ways. But between the mean
and the two extreme segments of this our proportion
it is not possible, that it could change, as will be
shown. Therefore this was rightly the fourth property common with the
highest Creator, and because it is counted among
the other proportions, assuming it preserves without
particularity or other difference the conditions of its
definitions, so we can herein compare it with our
Redeemer, who came, not to dissolve the law,
rather to fulfill it, and associated with men, making
himself obedient and subject to Mary and Joseph.
So joins this our proportion sent from Heaven
according to definition and conditions the
others, and degrades them not, rather glorifies them
in much wider scope, by holding fast the rule of unity
among all magnitudes without difference, and
never changes, as our holy Severinus says of the great God,
namely: "And while he stands firm, he gives Everything
motion." Therefore one must know, in order to recognize it among the
present magnitudes, that it is found ordered among its three
members always unchangeably according to continuous proportionality,
namely in the way, that the product of the
smaller segment with the sum of the smaller and
mean be equal to the square of the mean. And consequently
will be according to the tenth definition of the fifth the said
sum necessarily its greater extreme segment.
And if in this way three arbitrary magnitudes are found (ordered),
so they are called as ordered according to the proportion
which has a mean and two extreme segments, and their
greater extreme segment is always equal to the sum of the
smaller and mean, so that we can say, said
greater segment be the whole magnitude divided according to that condition into those
two parts namely smaller, extreme and mean segment.
Therefore is to be noted, that said pro-
portion cannot be rational, nor that ever the
smaller extreme can be determined by the mean by means of any
number, insofar as the greater segment is ratio-
nal. For they will always be irrational, as afterwards will be clearly
proven. And this agrees regarding the third
mode with God, as predicted.
