Cap. XVIII.

Of its ninth effect extending beyond the others.

If one forms in the circle the equilateral pentagon, and spans
over its two adjacent corners two straight lines starting from the end-
points of its sides, so will these neces-
sarily divide themselves among each other according to our proportion. And
each of their greater segments will always be the side of the said
pentagon. Let be e.g. the pentagon abcde and from the
endpoints c and a one draw the chord ac, which spans the angle
b, and from the endpoints b and e one draw
the other chord be, which spans the angle a. I say,
that these two lines ac and be intersect themselves among each other in the
point f according to the proportion which has a mean
and two extreme segments and the greater segment
of each is exactly the side of the pentagon. Accordingly is of the line
ac the greater segment cf, and the greater of the line bc is
ef. And each of the same is always equal to cf, and the greater seg-
ment of the line be is ef. And each of these is always equal
to the side of the said pentagon. And by the mathe-
maticians said two lines are called with other names
chords of the pentagon angle. If e.g. each of the said
chords were 10, since they will be equal to each other,
as their pentagon in the circle is equilateral, so would cf =
sqrt(125) - 5, af = 15 - sqrt(125) be, and likewise would be the
segment ef = sqrt(125) - 5 and bf = 15 - sqrt(125). And
the pentagon side would likewise be sqrt(125) - 5, and all this
proves in beautiful way the 11th of the 13th geometrically. And
by means of this effect we can through the knowledge of the
side arrive at the knowledge of all its chords and all their seg-
ments. And likewise we can vice versa through
the knowledge of the chords arrive at the knowledge of the side and of the
segments of said chords, by operating arithmetically
and geometrically, as we have taught with all carefulness in our
above cited work, to proceed with bino-
mials and other irrational lines, about which
our Philosopher treats in his 10th; and regarding the
lines he proves it in the 11th of the second and in the 29th of the
sixth, so that one easily in every case arrives at the knowledge of the
one and the other, which is a matter of great
use in our scientific and speculative occurren-
ces.
