Cap. XIX.

On its 10th highest effect.

If a magnitude is divided according to the said proportion
so proceed all effects, which can spring from it and its segments,
according to their constitution, number, species
and genus themselves from any other so divided
magnitude. Let be e.g. two so divided lines
present, the one ab namely divided in c, and its greater segment
be ac and the other de, and its greater segment be df.
And as we say of these two, so we understand it
of infinitely many others, which let themselves easily be determined by means of
Arithmetic. If one sets ab = 10, so would
ac = sqrt(125) - 5 and the other segment = 15 - sqrt(125) be.
And if one sets de = 12, so would df = sqrt(180) - 6 and
the other = 18 - sqrt(180) be. I say, that all that which ever
can result, regarding one of the two said lines
through equating, multiplication, division and all other
calculation types (the same) also always regarding the other
takes place, i.e. with each takes place the same relationship to its
greater segment and likewise takes place with each the same relationship
to its smaller segment, and likewise vice
versa from each of its segments to them themselves and likewise
behaves the product of the one with its parts and vice versa
to said parts, and likewise it behaves with subtract-
ing and dividing. Therefore is the relationship, which takes place from
the number 10 to its greater segment sqrt(125) - 5,
the same, as that from 12 to its greater segment
sqrt(180) - 6, and the relationship, which takes place from the sum of
10 plus sqrt(125) - 5 to sqrt(125) - 5, the same as that
of the sum of 12 plus sqrt(180) - 6 to sqrt(180) - 6. And thus
briefly said, one will at assumption continued in every possible way into the infi-
nite, inversion by means of the changed, in-
verted, connected, looser, turned and equal
proportionality, always arrive at one and the same designation and
at the same intensive effects, which proves infallibly a
very great harmony in all so divided magnitudes, as
will result later with the regular bodies and those dependent
on them, and All this concludes essentially
the 2nd of the 14th geometrically.
