Cap. XXII.

Of its thirteenth most worthy effect.

Regarding its thirteenth effect it is not little to
wonder, that without its assistance never the Pentagon, i.e.
the figure formed from five equal sides can be formed, which
was mentioned above at the ninth effect and will be mentioned
later *), without which Pentagon, as will be
asserted, it is not possible, that the noblest before all other
regular bodies, called Dodecahedron, can be formed or re-
presented, i.e. Body of twelve equilateral
and equiangular Pentagons, which with other name
is called Body formed of twelve pentagonal surfaces, whose form, as will be said, the divine
Plato attributed to the fifth element [essence], i.e. to the Heaven, from very appro-
priate reasons. Accordingly our Philo-
sopher teaches us in the fourth Book through the tenth to form a triangle of
following constitution, namely so, that each of its
two angles, which stand over its base line, be doubly
as large as the other, and this he did, because, if
we wanted to understand to form the equilateral and at the same time equiangular Five-gon
and to inscribe and circumscribe the same to the circle,
i.e. to form it exactly inside and outside of the circle,
this was impossible, if he had not first taught us,
to produce this triangle, as it becomes clear from the eleventh
and twelfth of the named fourth. And to
form the named triangle, one must necessarily divide a
line according to our divine proportion, as he proves to us
by the named tenth of the fourth, although he in
that place does not say, that the named line be divided according to the
mentioned proportion. His circumstances, why he
gave us yet no knowledge thereof, what the proportion
be, of which he treats in his fifth, he reserves to himself,
since it is not his custom, to insert into his proofs later fol-
lowing things, of which one has yet no knowledge;
rather he uses only the preceded and this order
understands itself for all his fifteen Books and therefore he said
regarding the named triangle not, that he divides the named
line according to the proportion, which has a mean and
two extreme segments, rather he says, according to the eleventh
of the second he makes from it two parts such, that the
square of the one be equal to the product of the other with the
whole named line, what in essence wants to say nothing else,
than to divide it according to named proportion, as it proceeds from the
third definition of the sixth and the twenty-ninth of the
aforementioned, and we besides said above in this
work, when was explained, how the mean and its
extreme segments be to be understood, regarding their first
cited effect.

*) Today one understands by that something quite different.
