Cap. XXV.

Why there cannot be more than five regular bodies.

It is fitting now to show, why not more than five
bodies can exist in nature such, namely that all
their boundary surfaces be among themselves equal and of equal corpo-
real and plane angles and likewise of equal sides,
which thing becomes clear therefrom, because for the production of a corpo-
real angle (i.e. Corner) the meeting of at least three
surface angles is necessary, because with two surface
angles alone a corporeal angle cannot be bounded.
Because now three angles of every equilateral hexagon are equal to
four right angles, and further of the Heptagon, i.e.
a seven-sided figure and generally of every equilateral
and also equiangular figure of more sides its three
angles are always greater than four Rights, as it evidently becomes clear from the thirty-
second of the first, and every corporeal
angle is smaller than four Rights, as the twenty-first
of the eleventh testifies, therefore it is impossible, that three
angles of the Hexagon and Heptagon, and generally of any
equilateral and equiangular figure of more sides
form a corporeal angle. And hereby is evident,
that no corporeal equilateral and equiangular figure from
surfaces of six or from more sides can form itself.
For if the three angles of the equilateral and equi-
angular hexagon are greater, than a corporeal angle,
so follows, that four and more will exceed the named corpo-
real angle far more strongly. Of the three angles of the
equilateral and equiangular Pentagon however is clear, that
they are smaller than four right angles; and four of the same are
greater than four Rights. Therefore one can from the three angles
of an equilateral and equiangular Five-gon form the corpo-
real angle, on the other hand from four of its angles or more
it is not possible to form a corporeal angle. And
therefore becomes only one body formed from equilateral and equi-
angular Pentagons, which Dodecahedron, with other name
Body from twelve Pentagons, is called by the Philosophers.
With the same form and contain the angles of the Five-
gons each to three all corporeal angles of the named body.
The same reasoning as regarding the Pentagons said, takes
place regarding the four-sided figures of equal sides and
angles. For every four-sided figure, if it shall be equilateral and
equiangular, will be according to the definition quadratic,
since all its angles will be right ones, as shows itself from the
thirty-second of the first. Therefore it is possible, from
three angles of such a plane figure to form a corporeal angle,
but from four of the same or several it is impos-
sible. Therefore can from such surface figures, insofar as they are four-
sided equilateral and equiangular, a solid body
be formed, which we call Cube, which is a body,
which is enclosed by six quadratic surfaces and has twelve
edges *) and eight corners. And with equilateral triangles
six angles are equal to four Rights according to the named thirty-
second of the first. Therefore less than six are smaller
than four Rights, and more than six are greater than four Rights.
Therefore one can from six angles or more of just such
triangles form no corporeal angle, but from three and
four and from five one can form it. And insofar as three angles
of the equilateral triangle contain a corporeal angle,
therefore becomes from equilateral triangles the body bounded by four equi-
lateral triangular surfaces formed, called Tetrahedron.
And if further four such triangles run together,
arises the eight-surfaced body, called Octahedron, and if
five equilateral triangles contain a corporeal angle,
then forms itself the body called Icosahedron to twenty
equilateral and equiangular triangular surfaces. It is therefore
according to what we said, completely clear, why of the regular
bodies so many and such and not more exist etc.

*) Instead of the expression "Edge" frequently the designation "Side" recurring saying the same returns.
