Cap. XXVI.

Of the production or formation of those five regular bodies and the ratio of each to the diameter of the sphere, *) and indeed first of the Tetrahedron.

After seen and understood, what regular bodies and
how many exactly be present, so follows now to say, how they
are formed, so that they be exactly surrounded by a sphere
and further, what ratio and determination of them
or their sides to the diameter of the sphere must take place,
so that it encloses them exactly. Means of the same one ar-
rives to the knowledge of them all. Accordingly we will
speak first of the Tetrahedron, i.e. of the body from four equi-
lateral triangular surfaces and then gradually
of every other according to the sequence. I say therefore, named
body must be formed in following way: first one takes
the diameter of the sphere, in which we intend to insert it,
which we assume as the line ab. And this
be divided in point c such, that the segment ac be doubtly
as large as bc. *o) And one beat over it a semi-
circle adb and draw the line cd perpendicular to the line ab,
and draw the line bd and da. Sodann one describe the
circle fgh over the center e, whose radius be equal to the
line cd. In this circle one describe then an equi-
lateral triangle, as the second of the fourth teaches, and this
triangle be fgh. And from the center to its angle points
one draw the lines ef, eg, eh. Then one erect over the
center the line ek perpendicular to the surface of the circle fgh,
as the twelfth of the eleventh teaches, and this perpendicular one
make equal to the line ac; and from point k one let the
hypotenuses *) kf, kg, kh down. If one has observed these things so
exactly, so I say, that the pyramid of four
equilateral triangular surfaces be finished. And this will be exactly
circumscribed by the sphere of just that diameter ab.
And I assert, according to the ratio of the diameter
of the sphere to the side of the constructed pyramid, that the square
of the named diameter be the three-and-a-half-fold of the square of the
side of named pyramid, i.e. that the square of the dia-
meter contains the square of the side of the pyramid one and a half times,
i.e. as 3:2 and 6:4 behaves. And that wants to say,
that if the square of named diameter were 6, the
square of the side of the pyramid would be 4. And so it finds
itself proven in Geometry.

*) i.e. the circumscribed.
*o) cfr. Cap. LXXI.
*) cfr. Cap. XXI.
