Cap. XXVII.

Of the production of the cube and its ratio to the sphere.

It follows to show, how the Cube is formed, and
which ratio must be between its side and the dia-
meter of the sphere, so that it encloses it exactly.
Therefore I say, named body must be formed in following
way, namely: first one assume the diameter
of the sphere, in which we intend to insert it exactly.
And this be the line ab, over which I will describe the semicircle
adb. And then I will divide the diameter in the
point c, as I did it at the formation of the pre-
ceding pyramid, namely that the part ac be doubly so
large as bc, and the line cd one draw perpendicular to ab,
and one draw further still the lines db and da. Then one
form a square, of which all sides are equal to the line bd,
and this square be efgh. *) And over its four corners one
erect four perpendiculars to the surface of named square,
as the twelfth of the eleventh teaches. And each of these perpendiculars be
also equal to the line bd assumed, and named
four perpendiculars be ek, fl, gm, hn. And all these four perpendiculars
will stand according to the sixth of the said eleventh equidistant from
each other. And the angles enclosed by those and the sides of the
square are, according to the definition of the
perpendicular on the surface, Rights. Then one connect the
endpoints of these perpendiculars, by drawing the lines kl, lm,
mn, nk. If one observes these things with care exactly,
so the Cube will be ready, which we sought to form,
enclosed by six quadratic surfaces, what
is proven by the thirty-fourth of the first. The four
surfaces, which enclose it, and indeed those, whose
opposite sides are the four perpendiculars, are all
quadratic. That the Basis be quadratic, shows itself clearly
from our sentence, and likewise is proven through the named
thirty-fourth of the first and the tenth of the eleventh,
that the highest boundary surface, namely klmn also on its
part be quadratic. And likewise shows itself still through the
fourth of named eleventh, that all sides of the Cube stand right-
angled on their two opposite surfaces.
And just this *) will be exactly circumscribed by the sphere of the assum-
ed diameter. Therefore will the named
diameter in power always be the Triple of the side of the na-
med Cube, i.e. the square of named dia-
meter will be three times as large, as the square of the Cube
side. If e.g. the diameter were sqrt(300), so would have to be the
side of the Cube exactly 10. The knowledge thereof is for
many necessary cases appropriate.

*) seil. Cube.
