Cap. XXVIII.

How the Octahedron is formed, which lets itself be described exactly in the sphere, and its ratio to the sphere.

It is thirdly the body consisting of eight triangular surfaces
to be constructed, the so-called Octahedron, which likewise
shall be exactly enclosed by an assumed sphere,
of which sphere only the diameter be known to us. And
that happens in following way: One take the diameter
of the sphere, which be the line ab, which one halve in point c,
and over the whole line one beat the semicircle
abd and draw cd perpendicular to the line ab; and then connect
one the point d with the endpoint of named dia-
meter, namely with a and with b. Then one form a squ-
are, whose all sides are equal to the line bd, and
this square be efgh. And in this square one draw two
diameters, of which the one eg, the other fh be. These
intersect themselves among each other in point k. Therefore is according to the
fourth of the first clear, that each of these diameters is equal to the
line ab, which was assumed as diameter of the sphere,
since the angle d according to the first part of the thirtieth
of the third is a right one. And further is each of the angles
e, f, g, h a right one, according to the definition of the square. And
further is clear, that those two diameters eg and fh divide themselves
among each other to equal parts in point k. And
it becomes clear easily through derivation from the fifth and thirty-
second and sixth of the first. Now one erect over k
the line kl perpendicular to the plane of the square: which per-
pendicular one make equal to the half of the diameter eg or fh;
and then one let the Hypotenuses *) le, lf, lg, lh
down. And all these Hypotenuses will be according to the Afore-
mentioned and Presupposed, by means of the penultimate of the
first, which as often as it is necessary repeated stated,
among themselves and likewise equal to the sides of the square. We have
thus until here reached a pyramid of four equilateral triangular
surfaces over the named square, which pryamid
is the half of the eight-surfaced body, which we seek. Make
we then below the named square another,
to this similar pyramid in the same way, namely: We will
draw the named line lk, by boring through the named square
and penetrating it up to point m, in the way, that
the line km, which is located below the square, be equal
to the line lk, which stands over the named square. And
then I will connect the point m with all corner points of the
square, by drawing four other hypotenuse-like
lines, namely me, mf, mg, mh. And also of this
is proven according to the penultimate of the first and the others before
cited, that they be equal among themselves and also to the sides of the
named square, as it was proven of the other
hypotenuses above the square. And there-
with will, if one always observes the above named
things with care, the body of eight equilateral triangular
surfaces be ended, which will be exactly circumscribed by the sphere.
The ratio between the sphere and the named
body is, that the square of the diameter of the sphere to the
square of the side of named body is exactly double,
i.e. if the named diameter were 8, so would
the side of the Octahedron = sqrt(32) be, for their powers stand
among each other in double ratio, namely the square
of the diameter is the Double of the square of the side of the
named body, and so we have the construction and the
ratio regarding the sphere etc.

*) cfr. Cap. LXXI.
