Cap. XXIX.

Of the production and formation of the body called Icosahedron.

To produce the body from 20 equilateral triangular surfaces,
which be exactly surrounded by a given sphere, which has a rational
diameter. Evidently will the side
of named body be an irrational line, i.e. that, which
is called minor *) line, e.g. it be also here the diameter
of the given sphere ab, of which one assumes, that it either in
the mere length or only in its power **) be rational. And it
be divided in point c, so that ac be the quadruple of bc. ***)
And one beat over it, seil. ab a semicircle abd and draw
cd perpendicular to ab, and draw further the line db. Further beat
one with the length of the line db (as radius) the circle efghk about
l as center, in which one inscribe an equilateral pentagon,
which is marked by the same (letters). To the corners
of the same one draw from the center l the lines le, lf, lg,
lh, lk. And besides one describe in the same circle an
equilateral decagon. One halve accordingly all arcs, whose
chords are the sides of the pentagon, and draw from the
halving points to the endpoints of all sides of the inscri-
bed pentagon straight lines. And further one erect
over all corner points of named Pentagon the cathetus, +) as
the twelfth of the eleventh teaches, of which each be likewise equal to the line
db. And the endpoints of these five catheti one connect by
five corausts, ++) then will according to the sixth of the eleventh the
so directed catheti stand equidistant from each other. And
insofar as they are equal to each other, so will also in consequence of the
thirty-third the five corausts, which connect their endpoints,
be equal to the pentagon sides. Let then from
each peak of all catheti each two and two hypotenuses
down to the two neighboring corners of the inscribed deca-
gon and connect the endpoints of these ten hypotenuses, which
go down from the five ends of the catheti to the five points,
whose each is an intermediate center of the
inscribed decagon, by forming another
pentagon in the named circle. This will
likewise in consequence of the twenty-third of the third be equilateral.
And if you will have done this, you will see,
that you will have formed ten triangles, whose sides are the
ten hypotenuses, the five corausts and the five sides
of this inscribed pentagon. And that these triangles
be equilateral, you will recognize as follows: insofar
as well the radius of the described circle, as each of the
erected catheti equal to the line bd, according to the assumption is,
will according to the consequence of the fifteenth of the fourth
each of the catheti be equal to the side of the equilateral hexagon,
which is described in the circle, whose diameter [radius?]
equal to the line bd. And because according to the penultimate of the first
the square of each of the ten hypotenuses exceeds the square
of the cathetus by that of the decagon side, and also
according to the tenth of the thirteenth the square of the pentagon side
by the amount of the square of the decagon side is greater than
that of the just named, so will according to common knowledge each
of these hypotenuses be equal to the side of the pentagon. And
of the corausts has already been shown, that they are equal to the
sides of the pentagon. Therefore are all sides of these
ten triangles in deed either really sides of the for the
second time in the circle described equilateral pentagon,
or they are really equal to those. Therefore are the named
triangles equilateral. Further one erect still over the cen-
ter of the circle, which is the point l, another, equal to the first
cathetus, which be hn. And its upper end, which be the
point m, one connect with each endpoint of the first by means of
five corausts. Then will according to the sixth of the eleventh this
central cathetus, i.e. that erected in the center be equidistant
from each erected in the endpoints catheti. Therefore
will according to the thirty-third of the first these five corausts
be equal to the radius of the circle, and according to the consequence
of the fifteenth of the fourth each will be as large as the hexa-
gon side. Therefore one add to the named central cathetus
from both sides a line equal to the decagon side, i.e. above
upwards to one add mn, and to below beneath the
circle one add from the center of the circle lp. Then
one let from point n five hypotenuses down to the five
upper corner points of the ten triangles, which stand around in the circum-
ference; and from point p other five, to
the other five lower corner points. Then will these ten
hypotenuses among themselves according to the penultimate of the first and
the tenth of the thirteenth be equal to the sides of the inscribed
pentagon, as it has been proven of the other ten be-
fore. You have thus the body of twenty equi-
lateral triangular surfaces, whose all sides are equal to the
side of the Pentagon. And its diameter is the line
np, and of these twenty triangles stand ten in the circumference
above the circle, and five rise above it, while they
meet in point n, and the five others meet
below the circle in point p. And that this Icosahedron
called body be so formed, that the given sphere encloses it
exactly, reveals itself as follows. Insofar the line
hn equal to the hexagon side $), and the line mn equal to the decagon side,
which (polygons) equilateral and both circumscribed by the same circle efg,
so will the whole line ln according to the ninth
of the thirteenth be divided in point m according to the proportion, which has
a mean and two extreme segments; and its
greater segment will be the line lm. One halve therefore
lm in point q and it will according to common knowledge be pq = qn,
because pl just as mn equal to the decagon side was taken.
Therefore is qn = 1/2 np just as qm = 1/2 lm. Since now
according to the third of the thirteenth nq^2 = 5qm^2, so will also according
to the fifteenth of the fifth pn^2 = 5lm^2 be. For according to the
fourth of the second is pn^2 = 4qn^2 and likewise according to the same
lm^2 = 4qm^2. And the quadruple behaves to the quadruple as
the simple to the simple, as the fifteenth of the fifth
assures. And according to the second part of the corollary of the
eighth of the sixth, and according to the corollary of the seventeenth
of the same is further ab^2 = 5bd^2. For it is also ab = 5bc, since ac
was the quadruple of it. Because now according to assumption lm = bd
is, so will according to common knowledge ab = np be. If one
therefore described over the line np a semicircle, which be turned
around, until it returns to the first place, from where
it began to move, so will the sphere, which originated through its
movement (according to the definition of equal spheres)
be equal to the assumed sphere. And because the line lm
the mean proportional between ln and nm, and therefore also
between ln and pl, so will also each radius of the circle
be the mean proportional between ln and lp. And insofar
lm is equal to the radius of the circle, so will the semicircle described over pn
go through all points of the circumference of the circle
efg, therefore also through all corners of the solid body,
which are located on that semicircle. And because from the
same reason all corausts (which connect the endpoints of the in the
corners erected catheti with the endpoint of the central) are mean
proportionals between pm and mn, insofar
as each of them is equal to lm, so follows, that same semicircle
will also go through the remaining corners of the so constructed Icosahedron.
It is thus just this body insertable into the sphere,
whose diameter pn and therefore also into the sphere,
whose diameter is ab. And of the side of this solid figure
I assert, that it be the shorter line, for it is evident,
that the line bd be rational regarding its power, §§) insofar its
square is the fifth part of the square of the line ab which as
rational either regarding its immediate length or its
power was presupposed. Therefore are also further the ra-
dius and the radii of the circle efg rational in the
power, since its radius equal to bd. Therefore is according to the
twelfth of the thirteenth the side of the in our circle be-
scribed equilateral pentagon the smaller line. And
further as in the course of this proof has been shown, is the
side of this figure so large as the side of the pentagon. Therefore
is the side of this figure of twenty equilateral triangles
the smaller line, as stated before.

*) If the whole length of the continuously to be divided line is rational, so will the segments always be irrational, what gave occasion to the above today no longer customary naming.
**) seil. whose length itself or whose square be rational.
***) seil. perpendiculars. About the namings occurring here and in the Following cfr. Cap. LXXI. 
+) cathetus = perpendicular.
++) corausts = hypotenuses or connecting lines.
$) seil. equal to the radius bd of the circle.
§§) i.e. its second power.
