Cap. XXXI.

To find the sides of all five regular bodies.

To know to find the sides of the five aforementioned bodies, which are all
exactly circumscribed by one and the same sphere, of
which sphere the diameter alone is present to us, through
the named diameter, - Let be e.g.
the diameter of any sphere given to us, by means of which
we shall find the sides of the five aforementioned bodies,
which are all to be understood as inscribed in the same sphere,
so that, if one of their corner points touches it, they all
touch, i.e. that named sphere encloses them all exactly.
This we will do in following way: We divide this
diameter in point c such, that ac be the double of bc,
and halve it at the same time in point d. And we beat
over it the semicircle afb, to whose circumference two perpen-
diculars to the line ab are drawn, which may be ce and df.
And we connect e with a and b. Then is according to
the proof of the thirteenth of the thirteenth clear, that ae
is the side of the figure of four triangular and equilateral
surfaces, and in consequence
of the proof of the fourteen-
th of the Named, that eb
is the side of the Cube, and
according to the proof of the fif-
teenth, that fb is the side
of the figure of eight equi-
lateral triangular surfaces.
And it be now in point
a the line ag perpendicular to
ab, and also equal to the
same ab. Then one connect g with d, and be h the point,
wherein gd divides the periphery of the semicircle. And one lead
hk perpendicular on ab. And because ga the double of ad, so will
according to the fourth of the sixth hk be the double of hd.
For the two triangles gad and hkd are according to the thir-
ty-second of the first equiangular, since the angle a
of the greater is equal to the angle k of the smaller, because each
is a right one and the angle d is common to both. Therefore
is according to the fourth of the second hk in power the quadruple
of kd. Thus is according to the penultimate of the first hd in
power the quintuple of kd. And insofar db = hd is
(because d the center of the semicircle), so will likewise db
in power be the quintuple of kd. And insofar the whole
ab doubly as large as the whole bd, as well as the from the first
ab taken stretch ac is the double of cb, the from
the second, bd taken away, so will according to the nine-
teenth of the fifth bc, the remainder of the first be doubly as
large, as cd, the remainder of the second. Therefore is the
whole bd the triple of cd. Therefore is the square of
bd the ninefold, i.e. nine times as large as the square
of cd. And because it itself *) was only the quintuple of kd^2,
so will according to the second part of the tenth of the
fifth dc^2 < kd^2 and therefore dc < kd be. It be therefore
dm = kd, and it go mn, which be perpendicular to ab, up to the
periphery and one connect n with b. Insofar now dk and dm
are equal to each other, so will in consequence of the definition thereof,
that any line from the center out is equidistant, the
two lines hk and mn equally far removed from the center,
and therefore in consequence of the second part of the thirteenth of the third
and of the second part of the third of the named be equal to each
other. Therefore is mn = hk, because hk was equal to it, and because ab
the double of bd and km the double of dk. And since
the square of bd the quintuple of the square of dk,
so will in consequence of the fifteenth of the fifth on equal way
the square of ab be the quintuple of the square of km,
because the square of the double behaves to the square
of the double, like the square of the simple to the squ-
are of the simple. And in consequence of the proof of the sixteenth
it shows itself, that the sphere diameter in power is equal to the
quintuple of the hexagon side of the to the regular Icosahedron
relative circle. **) Thus is km equal to the hexagon side
of the to the figure of twenty surfaces ***) belonging circle. For
the diameter of the sphere, which is ab, is in power equal to the
quintuple as well of the hexagon side of the circle of that figure,
as of that of mk. And further also is in consequence of the proof of the
same +) evident, that the diameter of the sphere is com-
posed of the hexagon- and the two decagon sides
of the to the figure of twenty surfaces relative circle.
Insofar now km is so large, as the side of the hexagon, and
also ak = mb is, because they, remainders or want you say
remnants of the equal pieces are; so will, after
one has taken these equal ones away from it ++), mb remain as side of the
decagon. Because now mn results as hexagon side,
since it is equal to km, so will according to the penultimate of the
first and the tenth of the thirteenth nb as side of the Penta-
gon of the to the figure of twenty surfaces belonging circle
result. And because from the proof of the sixteenth of the
named proceeds, that the side of the pentagon of the to the
figure of twenty surfaces belonging circle be the side of the
same figure of twenty surfaces, so is clear, that the
line nb be the side of this figure. Only divide therefore eb (which
is the side of the by the assumed sphere exactly enclos-
ed Cube), continuously in point p, and be its greater seg-
ment pb, so is according to the proof of the Preceding clear,
that pb be the side of the figure of twelve surfaces. There are
therefore the sides of the five previously set up bodies by means of
the to us alone presented diameter of the sphere found,
which sides are following, namely: ae of the pyramid of four
surfaces, $), eb side of the Cube, fb side of the Eight-surfaced-one and
nb side of the Twenty-surfaced-one, and the line pb side of the Twelve-
surfaced-one. And which of these sides are the greater among
each other, results thus: It is clear, that ... ae > eb
because the arc ae > arc eb and further . . . . fb < eb
and the side eb > nb
And I assert further, that nb > pb
For insofar ac the double of cb, so will according to the fourth
of the second the square of ac be the quadruple of the square
of cb. And according to the second part of the Corollary
of the eighth of the sixth, and the Corollary of the seventeenth of the
named is clear, that the square of ab is the triple of the
square of bc. But it behaves according to the twenty-
first of the sixth:
ab^2 : be^2 = be^2 : bc^2 since the proportion takes place, of:
ab : be = be : bc according to the second part of the Coro-
llary of the eighth of the sixth. Therefore is according to the eleventh of the fifth the
square of be the triple of the square of bc. And because
the square of ac is the quadruple of the same square, as
has been proven, so will according to the first part of the
tenth of the fifth ac^2 > be^2 be, and therefore will the line
ac > be, and therefore all the more am be greater. ++) And it
is already from the ninth of the thirteenth evident, that if
the line am is continuously divided, its greater segment will be the line
km, which is equal to mn, and further if be according to the
same proportion, i.e. is continuously divided, its greater seg-
ment is the line pb. Insofar now the whole am is greater than the
whole be, will mn, which equals, the greater segment
am, be greater than pb, which is the greater segment of eb.
And this is evident, according to the second of the fourteenth
Book, which without help of anyone of those, which follow, is
established with firm proof. Thus is according to the nineteenth
of the first much stronger nb > pb. From that becomes clear, that the sides
of the five aforementioned bodies almost with the same order, as
they follow among each other, exceed each other reciprocally. Only
this has the objection, namely this order is not with the
Cube and the Octahedron, i.e. the Eight-surfaced-one observed,
since the side of the Octahedron exceeds that of the Cube, un-
damaged, that the Cube precedes the Octahedron regarding its pro-
duction and formation, as from the thirteenth be-
comes clear, and that is not without mystery. Therefore places it-
self regarding its formation the Cube before the Octahedron, because
through the same division of the diameter of the presented
sphere the side of the pyramid of four three-sided base surfaces
and the side of the Cube is found. It is thus the side ae of the
pyramid greater, than the sides of all remaining bodies, and it
next follows bf, the side of the Octahedron, greater than the sides
of all remaining bodies, which follow after it. And thirdly follows
according to size eb, the side of the Cube, and fourthly comes
nb, side of the Twenty-surfaced-one, i.e. Icosahedron, and the
smallest of all is pb, side of the Dodecahedron, i.e. Body
of twelve pentagonal base surfaces.

*) seil. bd^2.
**) i.e. its square is equal to the fivefold square of the radius of that circle, in which the Pentagons were described (cfr. Cap. XXIX).
***) seil. Icosahedron.
+) seil. Consequence.
++) seil. from the sphere diameter
$) seil. regular Tetrahedron.
++) seil. than be.
