Cap. XXXII.

Of the ratio of named bodies among each other and to those dependent on them.

After understood, that the five named regular
bodies suffice, and proven the impossibility, that there
be more of them than five, at the same time with the Art and Manner,
how those dependent on them proceed into the infinite, so
follows to have to give the manner of their ratios among
each other, as well insofar they refer to extension and content,
as to their surface; then of the inclusion
of the one in the other and vice versa, and first of their
corporeal content. The ratios of the one to the other
will be, with regard to our above cited proposition,
always irrational, which inserts itself into their compositions and
formations, as stated, with exception of the Tetrahedron,
Cube and Octahedron, where in consequence of the exactness of their ra-
tios to the diameter of the sphere, in which they can be
described, the same can be perhaps sometimes rational; that,
of the Icosahedron however and that of the Dodecahedron, compared with any
others, can from the named reason never
be rational. And thus, Exalted Duke, I believe here
not to be allowed to say more Other, because it would mean to enlarge the Volume with
infinitely many irrationalities, wherein
much more the understanding would confuse itself, than find pleasure in it,
to which goal our study is always directed, and
it seems to me so much to suffice for that, which in our
special, of the named bodies composed Tractate
in our work has been said, whereupon at the all World
communicated Quantity is easy to recur. And by means of their
dimensions, which set up at that place, one will according
to the versedness of the Spirits, at the same time with the use
be able to have great pleasure. And likewise I say like-
wise of all those dependent on them, of which at that
place some are set up. True is, that one according to the tenth
of the fourteenth concludes, that the ratio of the Dodecahedron
to the Icosahedron when both are described in the same sphere,
is exactly the same, as that, of all its surfaces to the
sum of all surfaces of that. And the sixteenth of the named
says, that the Octahedron is decomposable into two pyramids of equal height,
which is equal to the radius of the sphere, into
which it has been constructed, and whose base surfaces are squares,
which quadratic surface is half so large as the square
of the diameter *). The knowledge thereof comes us regarding
its measuring very effectively to help, and by means of it one can
arrive at many others.
