Cap. XXXIII.

Of the ratio of all their surfaces to each other.

Their surfaces, Exalted Duke, we can designate as in
the same way among themselves proportional, as re-
garding their corporeal mass said, i.e. as irrational
because of the malice of the pentagonal figure, which with
the Dodecahedron steps in between. But with the remaining they
can sometimes be rational, like those of the Tetrahedron, Cube, Octa-
hedron, since they consist of Triangles and Squares, and
in their ratio to the diameter of their sphere known, wherein they
themselves, as seen before, form. True is, what the eighth of the
fourteenth concludes, that all surfaces of the twelve-surfaced penta-
gonal body to all surfaces of the body consisting of twenty triangles,
i.e. those of the Dodecahedron to those of the
Icosahedron behave themselves like the side of the Cube to the Triangle-side
of the Twenty-surfaced-one, *) when all named bodies exactly by
one and the same sphere be contained or enclosed. There-
fore it seems to me not appropriate, to pass over the wonderful agree-
ment of their surfaces among themselves with silence,
that namely the surfaces of the Dodecahedron and those of the
Icosahedron each exactly by one and the same circle circumscribed,
as the fifth of the named fourteenth shows, which cir-
cumstance worthy of observation, and indeed when they will be described in the same sphere.
And regarding all surfaces of the
Tetrahedron to all surfaces of the Octahedron takes the according
to the fourteenth of the named fourteenth known proportion place,
namely that one of the Tetrahedron surfaces is equal to 1 1/3 of one
of the Octahedron surfaces, i.e. stands in the ratio sexquitertia, **)
which takes place when the greater contains the smaller part one and one
third times as 8 : 6 and that of 12 : 9. And the ratio
of all Octahedron surfaces together to the sum of all Tetrahedron
surfaces is sexquialtera, i.e. equal 1 : 1 1/2, as e.g. if
those of the Octahedron 6, and those 4 were, which takes place, when
the greater contains the smaller one and a half times, when they
belong to one and the same sphere. And all those of the Tetra-
hedron yield in connection with those of the Octahedron a so-
called mean surface, as the thirteenth of the named
fourteenth wants it. And all surfaces of the Hexahedron or Cube
yield together the double of the square of the diameter
of the sphere circumscribing it. And in consequence of the last of the
fourteenth is the perpendicular, which one falls from the center of the sphere
on each of the surfaces of the named Cube, always equal
to the half of the side of named Cube. Were e.g. the na-
med diameter equal to 4, so would all those surfaces to-
gether be equal to 32, and if the named perpendicular
= 1 were, so would be the Cube side = 2. Since we about these pro-
portions and surfaces sufficiently have treated in our
work, so may they be to the present at the same time with
those relative to the on all kinds dependent on those bodies
a supplement, by operating carefully algebraically.

*) in text to read: sub duplo.
**) The expression is here for brevity retained = 4:3. Likewise sesquialtera = 3:2 etc.
