Cap. XLVI.

Why there cannot be more of the inscriptions in question.

From the previously Discussed, Exalted Duke, shows
itself therefore, since there are five regular bodies, that, if
each could be formed in each in due manner,
as presupposed, from that would follow, that each receive four of them,
and consequently would take place among all bodies twenty,
i.e. four times five inscriptions. But because not
each receives each, as cited, so there are only twelve in-
scriptions; namely only one of the Octahedron into the Tetrahedron,
and two into the Cube, namely of the Tetrahedron and of the Octa-
hedron, and further two into the Octahedron, namely one of the Cube
and one of the Tetrahedron. And three are those in the Icosahedron,
namely one of the Dodecahedron and one of the Cube, and the
other of the Tetrahedron. And four are those in the Dodecahedron, name-
ly one of the Icosahedron, the other of the Cube, the third of the
Octahedron and the fourth of the Tetrahedron, which in All are twelve
according to number. For in the four-faced pyramid there
are neither sides nor angles, nor surfaces, on which
the corners of the three other regular bodies, except
the Octahedron, could support themselves. The Cube further can receive in itself
the Pyramid and the Octahedron, and the Octahedron
only the Cube and the Pyramid, and in none of the same
is it possible, to place any one of the two others, namely Icosa-
hedron and Dodecahedron. And notwithstanding the Icosa-
hedron grants reception to the three, it has denied it to the Octahedron
alone, and this happened out of Achtung for the glo-
rious Sign, which makes all Demons tremble, namely
before the Holy Cross, which the three lines form, which
intersect each other right-angled, which drawn diametrically from one to the
other endpoint. There is therein no place
of such kind, that they strictly corresponding to the arrangement of the said Octa-
hedron let themselves pull through. But since the Dodeca-
hedron endowed among the others with a special privilege,
so it has denied the dwelling to none or forbidden,
as accommodation of all. And therefore also the old
Plato ascribed it at the same time from the other cited reasons to the Uni-
verse. **)

**) Source writings f. Art History N. S. II. 16
