Cap. XLIX.

Of the plane solid and empty, truncated solid and empty, elevated plane and elevated truncated Hexahedron.

VII. VIII. The plane solid and hollow Hexahedron, or
want we say Cube, has twelve lines or sides or
edges and 24 plane angles and eight corners and six Bases
or surfaces, which contain it, all quadratic, equilateral and
equiangular, similar to the form of the devilish instrument, what
otherwise also called Die or Knuckle.

IX. X. The blunted or truncated plane, likewise
solid or hollow Hexahedron has 24 lines, which around the same
yield 48 plane angles, whereof 24 right, the others are acute.
And it has twelve corners and is bounded by 14 surfaces or Bases,
namely by six squares and eight triangles. And
all named lines are common to the squares and triangles,
because those six squares, when one summarizes them
cornerwise, necessarily yield eight triangles, as
the hexagons in the truncated Tetrahedron did. And it arises
from the Cube thereby, that the same is cut through uniformly in the middle
of each of its sides, as its materi-
ally presented form shows to the eye.

XI. XII. The elevated solid or hollow Hexahedron: To its
construction serve 36 lines, which connected among themselves yield 72 plane
angles and six pyramidal corners, each contained by four plane
angles. And it is clothed by 24 triangular surfaces,
which properly are not to be designated as Bases.
And of those lines are twelve common to all those three-sided sur-
faces, which enclose and touch it, and the named
body is composed of hexagonal *) four-sided outer Pyramids,
which all corresponding to the location of the body
are perceived by the eye. And further from
the inner Cube, over which the said Pyramids
stand, and which only the understanding can imagine, because it
hides itself completely from the eye, in consequence of the position of the besagten
Pyramids on the same, and the six quadratic sur-
faces of that Cube are the base surfaces of named six Pyra-
miden, which are all of equal height, and are to the eye
hidden and surround unseen named Cube.

XIII. XIV. The truncated, elevated solid or hollow
Hexahedron has 72 lines, or sides or edges, and these
form 144 plane angles and of corners they form 14, all
pyramidal. Of these are six formed of angular four-sided, eight
of three-sided Pyramids, and of the named
lines are 24 common to the three- and four-sided Pyramids.
And it has 48 side surfaces or surfaces, which surround it,
all three-sided, and this so formed body is compo-
sed of the truncated solid Inner, only by the
understanding perceivable Hexahedron, and of 14 Pyramids,
as has been said, and in the position on the plane rests
it always on three pyramid peaks or points, as the shape
shows.

*) The text says "sechseckigen", but context suggests "six" (sechs) pyramids which are "four-sided" (vierseitigen). Likely "six four-sided...". Or maybe "hexagonal" is referring to base? No, base is square. Translation: "of six four-sided..."
