Cap. L.

Of the plane solid or hollow, and truncated solid or hollow, and elevated solid or hollow Octahedron.

XV. XVI. The plane solid or hollow Octahedron contains in
itself twelve lines and 24 plane angles, and of corporeal *)
it has six and is bounded by eight equilateral, and also equiangular
triangular Planes, as it presents itself to us in its presented
material form.

XVII. XVIII. The truncated or cut plane
solid or hollow Octahedron has 36 lines, which form 72 plane
angles, namely 48 belong to the Hexagons, and 24 to the
Squares, and it contains 24 corners and has 14 Bases, where-
of eight Hexagons, i.e. with six sides and six Four-sides,
i.e. Squares are. But of said lines are 24 common
namely to the Squares and Hexagons. And those Squares
form themselves from the Hexagons, so far all eight touch each
other largely, of which All clear from its material Form
the eye makes known the truth to the understanding clearly. And from
this it is further not possible, to form its Elevated,
which generally likewise presents itself from the lack of the Hexagons,
which, as remarked at the truncated Tetrahedron,
allow to form no corners. And it forms itself from the
preceding by uniform cutting off of each of its
sides to a third.

XIX. XX. The plane elevated solid or hollow Octahedron
has 36 lines of equal length and has 72 plane angles and
eight pyramidal corners, and is contained of 24 planes, all tri-
angular, equilateral and equiangular, which surround it exactly.
But of those lines are twelve common to all triangles
of the Pyramids. And this body consists of eight
angular, equilateral and equiangular three-sided Pyra-
mids of equal height, which all appear from outside,
and yet from the Inner Octahedron, which perceivable only through the ima-
gination of the understanding, and the Bases of this
Octahedron are the base surfaces of said eight Pyramids, as
its material form announces to us.

*) Instead of "corporeal angle" the synonymous: "Corner" as the shorter is mostly preferred.
