Cap. LI.

Of the plane solid or hollow and of the truncated solid or hollow, and elevated solid or hollow Icosahedron.

XXI. XXII. The plane solid or hollow Icosahedron contains
30 all among themselves equal lines or sides; and these
generate in it 60 plane angles and twelve corners. And
further they form in the same 20 boundary surfaces, which all
triangular, equilateral and equiangular, and each of the named
corners consists or is contained in five plane angles of named
three-sided limit surfaces, as its material figure
likewise shows.

XXIII. XXIV. The truncated plane, solid or hollow
Icosahedron has 90 sides or lines, and there are 136 plane
angles, whereof 120 belong to the triangles, which serve
to its composition, and 60 are of the Pentagons, which
likewise come thereto, which all are equilateral. And these
lines form around the named body 32 surfaces, of which
20 Hexagons, i.e. of six equal sides, and twelve Penta-
gons, i.e. of five equal sides are. And all are according to their
degree among themselves equilateral and also equiangular, i.e. that
all Hexagons among themselves are of equal angles, und likewise
all Pentagons among themselves are of equal angles. But the
sides all, as well of the Hexa- as of the Pentagons, are all
among each other equal. Only in the angles are the Penta-
and Hexagons different. And this so constituted body
arises from the previous regular, if one cuts off each
of its sides uniformly in its third part. And
through these cuts arise, as said, 20 Hexa- and twelve
Pentagons and 30 corporeal or solid corners. But of
said lines are 60 common to the Hexa- and Penta-
gons, because the 20 Hexagons, in equal way with each other
connected, necessarily generate twelve Pentagons. And
also of these can no elevated result, in consequence of the
lack of said Hexagon, as we have said above at the truncated Tetra-
hedron and truncated Octahedron.

XXV. XXVI. The elevated solid and hollow Icosahedron has in
itself 90 lines and 180 plane angles and 20 pyramidal corners, und
has 60 limit- or surfaces, which surround it, all tri-
angular, equilateral and also equiangular. But of the 90 lines
are 30 common to each of the surfaces of its 20 Pyramids.
And the named body consists of 20 angular three-sided,
equilateral and equiangular Pyramids of equal height,
and of the whole Inner Icosahedron, which only through the
imagination perceivable to the understanding, and its limit
surfaces are likewise base surfaces of named 20 Pyramids,
which All still its peculiar material form makes
clear.
