Cap. LII.

Of the plane solid or hollow, and of the truncated  solid or hollow, and of the elevated solid or hollow and  truncated elevated solid or hollow Dodecahedron, and  its production or dependency.

XXVII. XXVIII. The plane solid or hollow Dodecahedron
has 30 equal lines or sides, which generate therein 60 plane angles,
and has 20 corners and twelve base- or sur-
faces, which contain it, and these are all Pentagons of
among themselves throughout equal sides and angles, as illuminates.

XXIX. XXX. The headless or truncated plane solid
or hollow Dodecahedron has 60 lines, all of equal length and
has 120 plane angles and 30 corners. But of the 120 plane
are 60 triangle- and 60 pentagon-angles. And those triangles are
with necessity occasioned from said Pentagons, if one
connects these cornerwise among each other, as it has been said at the produc-
tion of the truncated of the Tetrahedron and Octahedron,
which were formed of Hexa-, Tetra- and Triangles, and likewise at the trun-
cated Icosahedron of Hexa- and Pentagons,
as the material figure shows. And each of the said
corners is formed and contained of four plane angles, where-
of two from triangles and two from in one and the same
points converging Pentagons belong. And all
its lines or sides are common to the Triangles and Penta-
gons, because if the one and the others are
applied in correct manner, the one is the cause of the other,
i.e. the Triangles of the Pentagons and the Penta-
gons of the Triangles. And as well the twelve equilateral Penta-
gons, cornerwise connected, yield in the named body 20 Tria-
ngles, so can we also still say, that 20 Tria-
ngles cornerwise with each other connected, generate twelve likewise
equilateral Pentagons. And therefrom illuminates, that all
said lines among them be common, as said
been. And of the surrounding surfaces are 32, whereof twelve
equilateral and equiangular Pentagons and 20 likewise
equilateral Triangles are, all among each other mutually
generated, as we have stated, and as its material
form reveals. — And this proceeds from the Preceding,
by being cut off in the middle of each of its sides uniformly.

XXXI. XXXII. The elevated solid or hollow Dodecahedron
has 90 lines and 180 plane angles and of corporeal twelve
elevated pyramidal five-sided, and has further 20 corporeal
six-sided base surfaces. *) And it has 60 surfaces,
all triangular, equilateral and equiangular. But of the
named 90 lines are twelve common to the twelve Bases of the five-
sided Pyramids, whose base surfaces likewise must be
pentagonal. And these are the limit surfaces of the
Inner regular Dodecahedron, which serves to its compo-
sition, and which the understanding alone by means of the ima-
gination grasps, and only these 30 common lines come together to the
generation of the 20 indented corners, which, as said,
are hexagonal, i.e., that to their formation six lines contri-
bute. And said body is formed from the inner aforementioned
regular Dodecahedron and of twelve angular five-sided equi-
lateral and equiangular Pyramids of equal height.
And their base surfaces are the same base surfaces of the
inner, as stated before.

XXXIII. XXXIV. The truncated elevated solid or
hollow Dodecahedron has sides or lines of the number 180, where-
of 60 are raised to the generation of the five-sided Pyramids,
60 are raised to the constitution of the three-sided Pyramids, the
other 60 are lower: all sides of the named
Pyramids, i.e. of the Pentagons and Triangles. And this so
shaped body puts itself together from the plane truncated inner
Dodecahedron, which alone through the imagina-
tion offers itself to the understanding, and of 32 Pyramids, whereof
twelve are five-sided and among themselves of equal height. And the
others 20 are three-sided, likewise of among each other equal
Height. And the base surfaces of these Pyramids are the sur-
faces of the named blunted Dodecahedron, by
referring each to the to it belonging, i.e. the triangular to the three-
sided Pyramids, and the pentagonal to the pentagonal
Pyramids. And in the position on the plane rests
it always on six points or pyramidal peaks, **) of
which peaks one from the five-sided and the other five
originate from the three-sided Pyramids. This hovering in the air
seems to the eye as something contradictory, that it be
similar peaks and one (from them different). ***) And it
is this, Exalted Duke, of great Abstraction and deep
Science, and I know, who grasps it, will cer-
tainly not puish me lies. And to its measuring one ar-
rives by means of the subtlest practice, especially of Algebra
and Almucabala, which known only to Few and by us in
our Work well proven, with instructions, to be able to learn
them easily. And similar way it behaves with the
measuring of the truncated Icosahedron, in which Hexa-
and Pentagons alternate with each other, which all the measurements
teach to know.

*) seil. Corners. (Wait, the German footnote says "seil. Ecken" correction for "Grundflächen" (base surfaces)? The text says "20 körperliche sechsseitige Grundflächen". The footnote 1) says "seil. Ecken". So it should translate to "20 corporeal six-sided corners".)
**) 1) cfr. Cap LI. (Wait, the footnote number in source is 1, but here it is 90).
***) The wordplay is in the translat. not to reproduce.
