Cap. LIII.

Of the plane full or hollow and the elevated full or hollow 26-faced Body and its Origin. *)

XXXV. XXXVI. Another to the aforementioned, to this
very dissimilar body, Exalted Duke, finds itself under
the name Body of 26 Surfaces, which descend from highly simple
Principle and Origin. Of them are 18 equi-
lateral and rectangular Squares and eight are Triangles,
likewise equilateral and equiangular. And this body has
48 sides or lines and 96 plane angles, whereof 72, and
indeed those of its 18 quadratic surfaces, all right,
and 24, namely those of its eight equilateral Triangles are
acute. And these 96 contribute with each other to the production of
24 corners in the same, whereof each consists of a surface angle
of the Triangle and three right angles of three Squares.
And of its 48 lines are 24 common to the Triangles and Squares,
because from those according to the suitable circumstances with
each other connected 18 squares necessarily those eight Triangles
proceed, which are formed just so, as it has been remarked of the other
truncated before. And the origin of this
Body goes out from the Hexahedron, **) by being cut off
uniformly to all its parts, as in similar way its
material form shows to the eye here. And its knowledge is
in many respect for him, who knows to apply it well
very useful, especially in the Architecture and this serve for the
knowledge of its Plane, Solid or Hollow.

XXXVII. XXXVIII. The solid or hollow elevated Seven-
and-twentytaced contains in itself to its formation 144 lines,
which among themselves, according to the occasional requirement con-
nected, generate in it 288 plane angles and 26 elevated pyramidal
raised corners. Of these are 18 contained by four acute
plane angles, namely each of them, and eight
are contained by three acute angles. And said body
consists of 26 edged Pyramids, whereof 18 four-sided and
eight three-sided are, which all ringsum from outside with the
eye can be distinguished and from the previous
inner, solid plane Twenty-six-faced, which alone
perceived through the imagination. And its 26 limit
surfaces are likewise base surfaces of the aforementioned 26 Py-
ramids, namely the eight Four-sides, those of the 18 edged four-
sided and the eight Triangles those, of the eight three-sided Pyrami-
ds. And how one also places this body on the plane,
always rests it on three points or pyramidal peaks, what
besides to the eye the probe of its material form suffi-
ciently enough will explain.

*) [Footnote from German edition about Title/Content mismatch or similar?]
**) 1) seil. from the truncated Hexahedron. The operation of the cutting off repeats itself thus twice at the ordinary Cube.
