Cap. LIV.

Of the plane, solid or hollow Seventy-two-faced Body.

XXXIX. XL. Among these, Exalted Duke, is fitting-
ly the body to be placed, which is called Seventy-two-faced,
which our Megarean Philosopher in the fourteenth
of his twelfth describes exactly. Although this has its limit surfaces
plane, angular, by angles bounded and non-uniform, so
can one not say, that it depends on any one of the regu-
lar bodies or be to be derived, but it forms and
generates itself alone, as it at the named place our Philosopher
shows, by means of the Dodekagon, i.e. the equilateral Twelve-
gon. And of its aforementioned surfaces are 48 four-sided
inequilateral and inequiangular, and they have only the two
opposite sides towards the two poles or, we
will say, the tip extended and among themselves equal.
And its other 24 limit surfaces are triangular and in equal
measure inequilateral. And of these twelve surround the
one of these peaks and twelve the other. And each of
them has two equal sides, namely those, which go towards the
point of the lower and upper Pole. Also from this one
will always be able to form its elevated on the same way, as it happened at the
others; *) but in consequence of the non-
uniformity of its limit surfaces its knowledge will be diffi-
cult, if it also might offer to the eye not little beauty.
And there would arise in the same corresponding to the number of its
72 limit surfaces 72 Pyramids, of
which Pyramids the base surfaces would be the same as with that,
and besides that inside thought, whose
elevated shape I have not endeavored, under the
present materially to represent, in order also to leave to the reader his
part, on whose Ingenium I rely.
And this Seventy-two-faced is used by the Architects
in their arrangements of the buildings much, insofar it
is a especially suitable form, especially, where it is necessary,
Tribunes or other vaults, or we will say, Heavens
to produce. And notwithstanding at the said buildings not
always exactly as many side surfaces are taken, so they direct
themselves after that model, by dividing it in all manner in four,
in three according to the place and position, where one intends to erect such build-
ing. According to their suitability they find
themselves very frequently at various places arranged and built,
as it at the invaluable antique Pantheon temple and
today's day by the Christians in the Capital of the World the
Rotonda called manifests itself, which was executed with so much zealous industry
and observation of the proportions, that the
light makes through a single small hole in its open left
peak the whole building shining and lighting. I omit
to speak of many other famous and praised cities,
like Florence, Venice, Padua, Naples and Bologna, in
which many buildings, sacred like profane, may they be small or large
according to the mirror of this are made. Also here in Your Mi-
land, in the worthy Sanctuary of San Scetro, forms the orna-
mental Chapel a part separated from this, **) and at the same time re-
servedly of something convex leaned on the wall
and in each of its base surfaces is a large Rose therewith con-
nected, which makes it ornamental. And in Your consecrated
and holiest Temple of Graces are its tribunes at the
first altar and those at the sides already nothing else than a
part after the manner of This, ***) by having added to its base surfaces those to
greater ornament still. And although many build
and pull the forms according to their arbitrariness here, since they neither
have of Vitruvius more knowledge, as of other Architects,
so they avail themselves nevertheless of the Art, although they do not
know it, as of the rough peasants Aristotle says, that they
disturb and know not, that they excite fear.
Likewise avail themselves these of the Art and know not, that
they use it. Also the Tailor and the Shoemaker use
the Geometry and know not, what it be; as also Masons,
Carpenters, Craftsmen and all Artists, who apply measures and pro-
portions, without knowing it. For as earlier
said, consists everything of Number, Weight and Measure. But what
shall we say of the modern buildings regarding their Art,
according to manifold and different patterns laid out
and ordered, which, since they sometimes offer to the eye beauty,
by being small, afterwards at the building execution the
weight not bear. And far specifically to come to thousand years,
they collapse much more already in the third. And
because of their being badly understood they make more repair,
than building costs. Who call themselves Architects and never the lids
of the herein excellent Volume of our highly worthy
Architect and great Mathematician Vitruvius have seen, who
has written about Architecture with the most important teachings for every build-
ing and who deviates therefrom, digs in the water and builds on
sand, ruins rather the Art; who, called Architects and not
know the difference of the point to the line: how should they
know that of the angles, without which it is not possible,
to build well, as it according to the aforementioned Vitruvius' statement
the great Jubilation and highest Joy manifests, which Pytha-
goras had, when he with sure Science found the true ra-
tio of the two straight lines, which contain the
right angle exactly according to the plumb, form which
reason he, by celebrating to the Gods therefore a great
sacrifice and feast, slaughtered 100 oxen, and this
angle is of such excellence, that it can never
change, and with other names call it the per-
fect Geometers also "Angle of Justice", because it
without his knowledge is not possible, to distinguish at any of our ac-
tions Good from Bad, nor can one ever
without him deliver certain measure on any manner. Therefore
it seems to the modern bunglers, as if be at their buildings
Nothing done, if they instead of the correct and necessary
antique Norm not insert any inconvenience of their follies,
by blaming those (also of such are found some), who want to lead them back to the correct and antique measure.
And those are it, who rejoice in our mathe-
matical disciplines, by following the true leader
at all buildings in the works of Vitruvius, from which
deviating one sees, how then our buildings stand, divine
like profane, soon crooked, soon doubly curved. And therefore
 is the word of Your Highness and its effect very appropriate,
regarding the city, that all Crooked (should be thrown) on the rubble heap,
and if You continue the already Begun,
You will transfer Your Milan from its abominable
and unsuitable impression in Short to not smal-
ler beauty than Florence, by removing the originators
thereof, for in Truth You understood more thereof
in sleep, than these seeing with thousand eyes, as the same
Your near relative, the illustrious Duke of Urbino, at the
admirable building of his worthy aforementioned Palace
proves. And this may with permission of those, who could take that
badly, what hitherto to their characterization said
been and also regarding the named body for the pre-
sent purpose suffice.

*) 1) This seems insofar at least not applicable and to require a modification, as the lengths of the side edges of their Pyramids can no longer correspond to the hitherto requirements, since their base surfaces themselves are no equilateral figures.
**) 1) seil. 72-faced. (Actually the footnote says "from this" referring to the body).
***) seil. 72-faced.
