Cap. LV.

Of the Procedure, to form more of them besides the named bodies and how their forms proceed into the Infinite.

It seems to me, Exalted Duke, not [necessary], to spread myself further over
the named bodies, so far their progress extends itself
at continued and successive, gradual cutting of its
corners up to the Infinite, and according to that their dif-
ferent forms multiply themselves. And the same they will,
since the way according to the previously Said stands open thereto, assume from
themselves already as further pursuable, because it is always said,
that it is easy, to add to the inventions. It is not
difficult, to add Something to the found things and there-
fore will the more or less Taking away or Ad-
ding to the previously Named be easy for every purpose.
And this we have until now pursued alone therefore, in order to
show, how from those five regular their peculiarity in
the others dependent on them always distills itself, after Manner
of the five simple substances, which contribute to the formation of every compo-
sed product. From this reason was (as
mentioned above) Plato forced, to ascribe the aforementioned five regu-
lar body forms to the five simple substances, namely Earth,
Air, Water, Fire and Heaven, as extensively
illuminates from his Timaeus, where he treats of the nature of the Universe.
And to the element of the Earth he ascribed the cubic
Form, i.e. that of the Hexahedron, so far at the movement
no other figure requires greater impact force, and among all
elements no firmer, more persistent and more durable finds itself
than the Earth. And that of the Tetrahedron he assigned to the Ele-
ment of the Fire, because it at its flaring up generates the pyra-
mid shape, as in similar way our fire reveals to the eye,
because we see it at the ground and in the depth broad and
uniform always decrease upwards, so that the tip
of its flame ends in a point, as the tip of every
pyramid does. The form of the Octahedron he ascribed to the Air.
For as the Air regarding a small movement follows the Fire,
so follows also to the pyramidal form with reference to its
mobility the form of the Octahedron. And the figure of the
Twenty-faced, i.e. of the Icosahedron he measured to the Water.
For so far it surrounded by more limit surfaces, than any
one of the others, so it seemed to him, that it passed faster into the
sphere at the movement of the substance, which scattered
falls down, than at that, of that which rises. And the Form
of the pentagonal Twelve-faced he ascribed to the Heaven,
as that, which is the reception place of all things. Similar
way is this Dodecahedron reception place and hostel of all
other four regular bodies, as proceeds from their mutual
inscription. And besides still as Alkinom
says about the Timaeus of Plato: For, as at the Heaven twelve
Signs are in its Zodiacus and each of them divides itself in
30 equal parts, so that its whole annual revolu-
tion amounts to 360, likewise has this Dodecahedron in itself twelve
pentagonal base surfaces, of which each is dissolved into five Triangles,
by holding fast the center, and each
triangle decomposes into six strips, what in every base surface
yields 30 triangles for each one, so that of them with all 360, as
at the named Zodiacus present. And just these forms
are from the highly famous Philosopher Calcidius, by explaining
the said Timaeus, very recommended. And
likewise from Macrobius, Aquilejus and very many others, for
they are indeed of all recommendation worthy, from the reasons,
which are cited at their production; by demonstrating the suffi-
ciency of the named five forms. As the
Number of named simple substances in Nature cannot incre-
ase, likewise it is not possible, to set up more of these five
regular bodies, which are of equal sides,
angles and limit surfaces, and of whose corners, if
they placed into the sphere, the same, as soon as one touches them,
all touch this, for could in Nature a sixth
simple substance be determined, so would the highest Creator
have been diminished in his creations, and without Pruden-
ce to judge about it, by not having recognized from the Beginning
everything for them Necessary, Appropriate. And I understand,
that certainly hereby and not by something Else Plato occa-
sioned, to ascribe these, as said, to each of the named simple substances,
who as very good Geometer and very deep
Mathematician argued so. By seeing, that regarding the
five different forms of the same in no way any
other let itself be thought or formed, which at equal sides,
base surfaces and angles strives, as said, towards the spherical,
as shows itself from the penultimate of the Thirteenth and
by us occasionally cited, he concluded not without merit,
that the Named belong to the five Simple, and that on
these every other Form depended. And although these five alone
are designated as regular, is nevertheless the sphere
not excluded, so far it is before all others most regu-
lar; and every other results from it as from the
highest Cause of Causes: and in it is no kind of Diver-
sity, but throughout Uniformity, and at every
Place has it its Beginning and its End, its Right and Left.
Wherefrom its Form arises, we will say here in the Following
concluding the named dependent, and then in the se-
quence of all other oblong, i.e. the bodies, which more
long than broad are.
