Cap. LVII.

How in the Sphere all five regular bodies let themselves be placed.

And in this sphere, Exalted Duke, let themselves all
five regular bodies be thought in this way. If one
first regarding the Tetrahedron over its surface, i.e.
its envelope or clothing four all equally much from
one to the other removed points are designated or thought
and those are connected by six lines, which
necessarily will go through inside the sphere,
so will be formed in it exactly the said body. And who in
thoughts drew the section with a plane surface to Every
Direction according to the extended straight lines, to him would
remain quite exactly said Tetrahedron. If e.g. (in or-
der that hereby the others satisfy be understood) the named
sphere were a stone Bombarde, and over it said
four points, which were designated with equal distances, so
would a chiseler or stone cutter, if he worked it with his
chisel or hewed out the surfaces, by letting the
four named points stand, form from the whole na-
med stone exactly the Tetrahedron. If one
likewise in named spherical surface eight from
each other the one from the other and this from that equally far re-
moved points designates and those by twelve straight lines
are connected, so will be in the imagination in named sphere
the second regular body, called Hexahedron or Cube,
i.e. the shape of the devilish die designated instru-
ment be placed. If these points likewise in a
stone block of a Bombarde on said manner are designated
and those by a stone mason on the manner as above connected
are, so he will have reduced the named sphere to cubic Form.
And if in said surface six points are noted,
so will likewise, if one strings them according to each of their equal distan-
ces as said by means of twelve straight lines to each
other, or you want say connects, in said sphere exactly
the third regular body, called Octahedron, be represented.
If the stone mason executes the same on a said stone,
so he will have made from a ball the body of eight three-
sided surfaces. And likewise, if twelve points
are designated, these by 30 straight lines connected, so
will he likewise in the named sphere have placed the fourth, Icosahedron
called body. Likewise will the stone mason
have reduced the stone to the body of 20 three-sided limit surfaces.
And if on the named manner 20 points
are noted, by likewise connecting them by means of 30 straight lines,
so will be formed in said sphere the fifth noblest regu-
lar body Dodecahedron, i.e. called body of twelve penta-
gonal limit surfaces. And likewise
would the stone mason have made from named ball the same form.
Therefore will with similar imaginations all be placed in the
sphere, in such a way, that their corner points will lie in the spherical
surface and if one of their corners touches it,
they touch immediately all, and in no way is it possible, that
one touch, without that the other does it, if the said body
is placed in the sphere. And through this infallible knowledge
will Your Highness occasionally (as we have used to do) with named
stone masons be able to have amusement, by judging in this way their
ignorance, by ordering them, that they from such
stones make any form of equal sides, surfaces and
angles, and that none be similar to the five of the regular,
e.g. by forcing the same to make a Capital or Basis or
Cornice for any column, which consist of four or
six equal surfaces on the said manner, and that the
of the four be no triangles or those of the six no squares,
and likewise with 8 or 20 surfaces, and none be triangular, or
of 12, and none be pentagonal, which things all are impos-
sible. But they, like bold boasters will say, to make Rome
and Thoma Maria and Mountains *), since of them many
find themselves, who cannot learn, nor care about it,
against the moral saying, which says: Be ashamed
not to want, that that, which you do not know, be taught to you.
Similar it behaves itself with that carpenter, who
to the question, what he would do, if no plane found itself,
answered, to make such a one with another and
the other joiner journeyman, who said, his square be to
large, in order to fit a small one according to it, by assuming, that
the right angles changed among themselves, and that one, who,
after to him the two equal rods in form of the Tau, i.e.
so T, placed before his eyes, soon the one, soon the other held for
longer, and many other similar wrongheads. As when
we spoke about such at the time of the building of the Palace of the Count
Girolamo in Rome of blessed memory discussing the building,
as it meets itself, while many Worthies of different
subjects were in his retinue, among others the at that
time named painter Melozzo da Forli, Melozzo and I, to the
pleasure of Speculation, encouraged the Count, that he have made a
certain Capital in one of these forms, by
explaining to the Count not the difficulties, but only,
that it be a worthy object. And assenting to this,
called the Count the Master to himself and said to him, whether he could
make it. This answered, it be a light thing
and that he have made of them several times. Therefore doubted
the Count, whether it be a worthy thing, as we recommend it to him.
When we however assured the same and added openly,
that he would not make it because of the above said impossibility,
so he asked, by calling the said stone hewer back to himself
(as they were still named at that time) once again,
whether he liked to make it. Thereupon smiled he almost mockingly at the yes,
and where not, be it always at the place, to hold him at the word.
The Count said to him: "If you do not make it, what want you lose?"
And that answered cleverly: "Not bad, Lord, just
as much as what to Your Exalted Glory seems, that
I can win." And they remained agreed, after
a deadline of 20 days set to him and he demanded four.
It happened, that he spoiled many marble blocks and made one
or more Abacus. Finally forced him the Count to
nothing further than to the compensation of the stones and he plucked
his hair out. But he ceased never, to want to know the cause
of the task. And he knew, it be the Frate,
so that he cherished not little resentment against me; and when he
found me, said he: Messer, Messer, I forgive you not
for the insult done to me, if you teach me not the pro-
cedure, to make them, and I offered myself to him, as far as I
was able and after I stayed several days longer in Rome,
was I to him no more hateful, and I gave him explana-
tion about these and about other things concerning him. And
this polite man wished me for it to be allowed to hand over
a worthy coat on his part. So I say, that in similar
cases also for Your Highness reasons present, Others to make attentive to
their error, and that they step not with so
much boastfulness before Your View, by despising almost everything Else.
So did once Hiero with the poet Simonides,
as Cicero in that work de natura deorum tells, which
Simonides obligated himself sacrilegiously, to be able to say to him exactly within the period
of one day, what God be,
and he asserted, it be not so difficult to know it, as
Others said. After the named term ended, asked
him Hiero, whether he found it. That one said, not yet and he
may allow him still some more time. After that happened
to him likewise, and shortly after several deadlines in-
serted, confessed That one, that he know it less as before,
and remained confused about his audacity. And this as far
as it refers itself to their placement in the sphere.

*) The wordplay is in the translat. not to reproduce.
