Cap. LVIII.

Of the oblong Bodies, i.e. the more long or high than wide.

It follows, Exalted Duke, for the complete knowledge
of this our Tractate, that to their knowledge something be said of the ob-
long bodies, i.e. of those, which
are more long or high, than wide, just as there are columns and their
pyramids, among which find themselves several sorts of the one and
the other. Therefore we will speak first of the columns
and their creation modes, then of their pyramids.
The columns are of two kinds: namely round and angular,
as of the plane figures some are curvilinear, and indeed
those, which are contained by curved or wound lines,
and others are called rectilinear, and indeed those, which
are contained by straight lines. The round column is a
body contained between two circular equal base surfaces.
And they are among themselves of equal distance. The
same is defined by our Philosopher in the eleventh, name-
ly as the round corporeal figure, whose base surfaces two
plane circles at the extreme end and the distance of their thickness,
i.e. height, and which forms the trace of the rectangular parallelo-
gram, if one holds fast the side, which contains the right
angle, and the named plane is turned around so far,
until it returns to its original position. And this
figure is called round column. Therefore results for the
round column and the sphere and the circle one and the same
Center.

It be e.g. the parallelogram abcd, *) i.e. four-sided
plane figure of equidistant sides and right angles.
And one hold the side ab fast; after this so held fast,
lead one the whole Parallelo-
gram so far around, until it
returns to its place,
from where it to move
began. The then by the
movement of this Parallelo-
gram described corpo-
real figure is called round column.
Its base surfaces are
two circles, the Center is
the point b, and the other
a is that, which the line da at
its movement or rotation describes, and their Center is
the point a and the Axis of this column is called the line ab,
which at the movement of the parallelogram remains standing firm.
And if we imagine the parallelogram abcd,
when it at its rotation arrives in the position abef, so con-
nect one them with the position, from which it began to mo-
ve according to the extension of the plane surface, so namely,
that the Whole be a single parallelogram dcef, and that
we have led therein the diameter de, which dia-
meter de will also be diameter of the column. That which
said of the column and the sphere and the circle, that they have one
and the same center, is so to be understood, so far
of these one and the same diameter present, e.g. we
have said, that de be diameter of this column. Therefore
must the sphere and the circle, whose diameter is the line de,
necessarily have one and the same Center, like the Cen-
ter of the present column. It may therefore the line de
divide the line ab in point g, **) and g will be Center
of the column. For he halves the axis of the column and also
the diameter of the column, as is proved by the twenty-sixth
of the first, because the angles, which lie at g,
are equal according to the fifteenth of the first. And the angles,
which lie at a, and at b, are according to Assumption Rights.
And the line ad is further equal bc, therefore is dg = eg and
likewise ag = gb. And so far the angles e and f Rights are,
so will, if one over the point g, with the interval dg
(and also) over the line de describes a circle, the same
according to the conversion of the first Part of the thirtieth of the
third go through the points c and f. Therefore is the point g
midpoint of the circle, whose diameter is diameter of the column,
and therefore is he it also of the sphere. And herefrom reveals it
itself, that to every rectangular Parallelogram the circle, and
to every column the Sphere can be circumscribed. And so is
clear, what that Theorem of our Philosopher in the na-
med Definition of the round column has wanted to present to us; about
which until here be enough, and we will in the Following speak of
the angular, as was promised.

*) Adjacent figure is only added for explanation of the text.
**) 1) cfr. 2. Fig. pag. 106. (Wait, the reference is to a figure not present).
