Cap. LXI.

Of the angular five-sided Columns.

XLIX. L. Thirdly one has the five-sided angular Columns,
i.e. those of five side surfaces, as here the Figure A, B,
whose each is tetragonic or four-sided. And the base sur-
faces of such Columns are always two Pentagons, i.e.
two straight-lined figures of five sides or angles.
For in all straight-lined figures the number of angles comes
to the number of their sides equal, and without this they can not
exist. And these have further equilateral or inequilateral to
be, according as their base surfaces allow it, as it shortly
before of the four-sided angular said, so far some Penta-
gons equilateral and equiangular, and others inequilateral
and in consequence of that inequiangular are. But every Pentagon,
which has three among themselves equal angles, will, if it is equi-
lateral, also be equiangular, as the seventh of the thir-
teenth shows. This is mentioned, because the Pentagon equal
sides with two among themselves equal angles could have, und
would yet not be quite equiangular. And these two Pen-
tagons, i.e. upper and lower, one has likewise with equal
distance regarding their Height in said Column to understand,
may the Columns now be equilateral or inequilateral, as
one will. And because, Exalted Duke, the kinds of the angular
Columns to the Infinite can grow, to the Diversity
of the straight-lined figures of more or less sides cor-
responding: Since at every angular Column its two base surfaces,
i.e. highest and deepst, necessarely two straight-lined
equal *) figures must be, i.e. that they in the side-
number agree, so that not for instance the one Basis three-,
the other four-sided is, and also of equal sides und
angles among each other to the Equality of the Columns corre-
sponding, how different they also varieties among themselves make
may, by forming the same soon equilateral and soon inequilateral,
therefore it seems to me not at the Place, myself in the na-
med further to spread, but only in memory to bring,
that their naming always from the base surfaces derived is,
i.e. according as the Bases are, are they named, e.g.
if the Bases are triangular, as it before at the bolt-
shaped body the Case, so are they three-sided called. And
if the same are tetragonic or four-sided, are they
four-sided called, and if pentagonic, five-sided, and
if they of six sides, are they six-sided called
and so forth. But may the base surfaces be, of what kind they want,
always will the side surfaces of each four-sided, right-angled be.
And of both of the until here mentioned, show their mate-
rial forms to the eye, what regarding the number said, in
their Table represented. And also at this one here below in
the plane in Perspective set figure regarding the same
number, as Your Highness will be able to see.

*) simili = similar, would give a wrong Sense.
