Cap. LXII.

Of the Manner, to be able to measure all Sorts of Columns, and indeed first of the round.

It seems to me now appropriate, the Procedure, all
kinds of Columns to be able to measure, to present. Notwith-
standing we about this completely in our great Work tre-
ated have, will I this yet shortly as an Abstract Your
Highness present, and first regarding all round, regard-
ing which This generally as Rule is valid. First measure
one one of their base surfaces, by reducing it according to the ap-
proximation method to the Square, which by the noble
Geometer Archimedes found, in his Book under the
Rubric of the Quadrature of the Circle set up, and in our
Work with its Proof cited, namely as follows:
One find the diameter of the Basis and this be with itself
multiplied: from the Product take one 11/14 or eleven
fourteenths or fourteenth parts, and if one these with the Height
of the Column multiplies, so yields this last Product the corpo-
real mass of the whole Column, *), e.g. in order this better to un-
derstand: It be the round Column abcd, whose Height ac or bd
equal 10 be, and of the Diameters of the Column the one
ab and the other cd each 7. I say, in order the Area-
content of this and every other similar to determine, take
one one of the named Diameters, which it also be,
ab or dc, whereupon nothing depends, since they are equal, name-
ly 7, and this 7 must one with itself multiply,
that makes 49 and from this say I, take one 11/14,
what 38 1/2 yields. And these say I, multiply one with the
Height or Length of the whole Column, i.e. with bd or ac.
Take we 10 hereto, so makes that 385, and so large call
we the whole Extension or corporeal Content of the whole
said Column. And this Case, Exalted Duke, wants to say,
that if these numbers Ells of any kind mean,
in the same 385 cubic Ashlars will be, i.e. like
Cubes, corresponding to every Direction one Ell, i.e. one Ell long,
one Ell wide and one Ell high, as the figure here to the side
shows. **) And likewise if said numbers Foot-measure mean,
just as much Feet as regarding the Ells said, and if
Step-measure Steps and at Palms Palms and so forth. And if
one said Column in Cubes dissolves, would therefrom 385 be.
And this suffice for the present purpose. Nonethc-
less gives it regarding the Quadrature and Measurement
named circular base surfaces many other Methods,
which all to one return, which we of the Series after
in our cited Work presented have. The Reason,
why one 11/14, i.e. of the 14 Parts of the with itself multi-
plied diameter in every circle takes, is that, because from
Archimedes with great Approximation found is, that the Circle
in Comparison with the Square of its diameter like 11:14
itself behaves, i.e. if the Square of the diameter 14 were,
so would the Circle 11 be, although this still from no scho-
lar with Accuracy, but yet with little Difference [proven]: ***)
as here in the figure to the eye illuminates clearly, that the Circle by so
much smaller is, than said Square, as the corners of the Squa-
re large are, which the Circle from its Space takes away,
which angles 3/14 from the whole Square, i.e. from the 14 Parts
3 are. And the 11 are from the circular Space en-
closed, as at the Square abcd clear, +) that its sides to the
Diameter of the Circle, i.e. the Line ef equal come,
which halves it, by going through the point g,
which Center of the said Circle is called, as in the Beginning
of the first our Philosopher tells. And so much regarding
the round.

*) seil. Body.
**) cfr. the Figures pag. 104 and 108.
***) The in the Text missing Verb: "proven" to supplement.
+) cfr. 1. Fig. pag. 110.
