Cap. LXIII.

Of the Procedure, to be able to measure all angular Columns.

XLV. XLVI. After the Method for the Measurement of the
round shown, so follows that of the angular. Regarding this is valid like-
wise this as Rule and with Accuracy, namely, that one always
the Area-content of one of their base surfaces determine, which one
wants, and what it makes, multiply one then with the Height
or Length of said Column. And this latter Product is exactly
its corporeal Mass or Extension. And may they be of
so many side surfaces, as one will, it deceives never. As-
sumed e.g. the angular tetragonic Column ab, which 10
high be and each of its base lines be 6 according to every direction.
I say, that one first the Area-content of one of the said
base surfaces determine. Since this equilateral, so will one one
of the sides, namely 6, with itself multiply, that makes
36, and this makes exactly the Content of the base surface. Now
say I, that one this with the Height or Length of the whole
named Column multiply, i.e. with ten makes 360. And
so many Ells or Feet will exactly the Content of said Column
amount to, in such a way, as it before of the round said. And
likewise determine one, if the base surfaces inequilateral
or besides irregular were, only according to the from us
in the named Work given Rules always their Area-
content and multiply the Product *) with their Height, and one
will the sought infallibly at each receive. And to the Sett-
ling of all others must one this same Rule maintain,
be they three-, or five-, or six- or seven-cornered and so
in Particulars, i.e. that one according to Requirement of their base
surfaces those first measure must, if they triangular are,
according to the Rule of the Triangles, and if they pentagonic are,
according to the Rule of the Pentagons, and if they hexagonic are,
on similar Art, about which Forms and Figures the Rules
extensively in our named Work given are, and since
in Consequence of their numerous printed and now in all
World distributed Quantity the Access to the same easy, so
care I myself here not about it them otherwise to ci-
te, and herewith will we with said Columns conclude
and in the Following of their Pyramids speak.

*) 1) seil. the Area-content. (Note: footnote 1 was on previous page in source but text is here).
*) cfr. 2. Fig. pag. 110. (This seems to be a misplaced footnote reference in my translation thought, checking source... footnote 1 is "vgl. 2. Fig. pag, 110." referring to "Producta" in text).
