Cap. LXIV.

Of the Pyramids and all their Diversities.

LVIII. It follows now in order, Exalted Duke,
of the Pyramids and their Diversities speak to
must, and indeed first of those, which round Pyramids
called become and then successively of all others. And
to full Knowledge will we with our Philosopher after
his eleventh say, the round Pyramid be a solid Figure
and be the Trace of a right-angled Triangle, after one
one of its sides held fast, which the right angle con-
tain, and the same so far around that turned, until it to the
Place returns, from which it to move itself began, and
if the held fast side equal to the led around is, so
will the Figure right-angled be and if that longer is, becomes
it acute-angled and if it shorter, obtuse-angled be. And
the Axis of the said Figure is the fixed or firm standing side,
and its base surface will a Circle be, and one calls the-
same Pyramid of the round Column, e.g. therewith the Said better
understood become: It be the Triangle, abc *), whose Angle b a
right one and it be the Side, which one holds fast ab, and af-
ter this held fast, turn one said Triangle so far a-
round, until it to the Place returns, from where it to move
itself began. This corporeal Figure now, which at the Movement of this
Triangle described or formed, becomes round Pyramid cal-
led. Of it gives it three Differences or Species. Therefrom,
because the one right-angled, the other acute-angled, the third
obtuse-angled is. And the first becomes formed, if the Side
ab equal to the Side bc were. And it be the Case, that the Line
bc any once at the Rotation of the Triangle in the Position
of the Line bd arrives, so that the Point c upon the Point d
falls and they one and the same Line belong to, this so un-
derstood, that she then herself with the Position in straight-lined Direc-
tion connects, from where the Movement began, so will this
Line as the Line bcd be.2) And
because according to the thirty-second of the
first and according to the fifth of the na-
med the Angle cab the Half of a
right is, so will Angle cad a right
be, and therefore becomes just this Pyra-
mide right-angled called. If but
the Side ab longer than the Side bc
is, so will she acute-angled be, because
then according to the thirty-second of the
first and the nineteenth of the named
the Angle cad smaller, than the
Half of the right be will. And there-
fore becomes the whole Angle cad smaller than a right and acute be,
therefore is said Pyramid acute-angled, und if the Side ab
smaller than Side bc is, becomes according to the thirty-second of the first
and the nineteenth of the named the Angle cab larger, than the
Half of the right, and the whole Angle cad which the Double of
just this cab is, larger than a right and an obtuse
be. Therefore becomes the Pyramid then fittingly obtuse-angled
called. And Axis of this Pyramid becomes the Line ab called,
and its Basis is the from the Line bc described Circle, whilst
that so around the Center b led around becomes. And this becomes
Pyramid of the round Column called, i.e., of that, which the
Parallelogram generate would, which from the two Lines
ab and bc arise would, whilst the Side ab firm remained, as it
before of the round Column said. And this suffice of the
round Pyramid and its different Kinds to the named
Zwecke, and it become of the remaining spoken.

*) Of Understanding sake is the adjacent Figure added.
2) i.e. directed be. 
