Cap. LXVI.

Of the Art and the Procedure, to be able to measure every Pyramid.

The correct and exact Size and Measure of every
whole Pyramid, Exalted Duke, be she round or angular,
becomes from the Size of its Column on following Art obtained. Fi-
rst become we the Arc or Content of the base surface of the
Pyramid, which we to measure intend, by means of the above
at the Finding of the corporeal Mass of all round and
angular Columns given Rules determine. And after
that found, so become we it with the Axis, i.e. Height
named Pyramid multiply, and what that makes, becomes
the Content of its whole Column be. And from this latter
Product become we always 1/3 take, i.e. its third Part,
and so much is exactly the corporeal Quantity of the named
Pyramid, and that fails never. It be e.g. the round Pyra-
mide abc, whose Basis the Circle bc forms, whose Dia-
meter 7 is, and its Axe ad, which 10 be, so say I, that
man first the Area-content of the Basis determine, as it be-
fore at the round Column happened. For as of the Columns
said, have also their Pyramids the same base surfaces and
the same Heights. For the Area of the Basis become we 38 1/2
receive, what with the Axe ad, i.e. 10 multiplied, 385 for
the Volume of its whole Column yield will. Now say I,
that man from this 1/3 take shall, then comes 128 1/3
out, and that is the Size said Pyramid. And there-
fore is regarding the given Accuracy to be-
mark, that at the round they themselves the Number after *) correspond
must, according to the until now found Ratio between
the Diameter and the Circumference. According to the above Given
lies it between 11 and 14, which, **) as at that Place sa-
id was, not with Precision, but little deviating from
Archimedes found. But it stands therefore not that back,
what we said have, that the round Pyramid the Size
after not exactly 1/3 its round Column be, although she in Conse-
quence of the Unknowledge of the Area-content of the Circle not quite with Pre-
cision through a Number expressed become can, but her 1/3 is it.
And said Column is her Triple, i.e., three times as large
as her Pyramid, as through the ninth of the twelfth proved
becomes. But all other angular can exactly through a Number
determined become, since their base surfaces straight-lined are.
And just as it with the round happened, must man the same
at all angular observe, accordingly what just so of these
in the eighth of the twelfth proved becomes, that they triple,
i. e. three times as large as their Pyramids are. And this be
to their sufficient Measurement said.

*) i. e. the number-value of their Content after.
**) seil. Data.
