Cap. LXIX.

Of the Measurement of all other regular and thereof dependent Bodies.

It must further of the Measurement of the regular
Bodies and the from them dependent spoken become.
Over the named regular Bodies concern I me
therefore not, me here otherwise still to spread, whilst I
already a special Tractate for the most illustrious Re-
lative of Your Highness Guido Utelio, Duke of Urbino,
in our to His Glory dedicated Work compiled
have and the Reader light on this recur can,
so far he to the public Use arrived is, as before mentioned
and in this Your famous City themselves many thereof find.
Whose Measurement is um so more speculative, ever more excellent
and more perfect they are, than the other Bodies, surely
an Object of the Cothurnus and not of the Folly. And
at that Place became sufficiently about it spoken. But
the Procedure at the others, from those dependent is
similar to that, which at the abbreviated Pyramids given
been, i.e. that man them to their whole complete
back-lead, and those according to the from us at the named Place
given Rules with Care measure, that Size pre-
serve, and then the Completion to its Whole according to the
Rules over the Pyramids apart likewise measure and that,
what it makes, from the Content of its whole regular Body
take away must, then is the Remaining exactly the Content
named dependent Body, if the said dependent to the
Number of the cut off belonged. So e.g. the cut off Tetra-
hedron, to which the Tips lack, in Comparison to its Whole,
which all small equal Pyramids of equal Form are.
And therefore become, after one measured, immediately through this
all other known be, the Number corresponding, which itself
for their Sides, or Base surfaces or other (Parts) turned out,
whereafter man himself in the Practice always direct must. And
after that obtained, will you them from their Whole, as
said, subtract. But if the named Dependent from the
Number of the Elevated were, then would man, in order its Measure
to obtain, to its Whole the Size of all those its small
Pyramids add, whose necessarily so many are, as
Base surfaces of its complete present. And so must man
himself shortly said more or less at said according to the
Light of their complete direct, whilst man to the same ad-
ds or takes away according to the cited Circumstances.
Wanted man himself otherwise behave, so would man in an un-
entangleable Chaos get. And therefore be regarding the-
same this the suitable Instruction, whilst I me on the ver-
sed Spirits and speculative, this and any other
other Science inclined Insight rely, which we always
at our whole Progress presupposed, especially the through
Excellence and Anthonomasy before all Others stand-
ing Your ducal Highness, to whom I in our Discourse
neither about Similar nor Other in no Way mean, as
to an Unknowing spoken to have, so far You without Diffe-
rence with all (Sciences) equipped and adorned,
for which, if I me thereover square spread wanted, not only the
Paper, but the Life not suffice would. But what
clearly clear is, needs not proved to become. So far You with
her View alone every sad Face healthy and glad make
and in Truth that Sun are, which both Poles warms
and illuminates. And what more can today of You said
become under the Mortals? if not, that You the only
Rest and Refreshment not only of Italy but the whole
Christendom are! That one *) shows herself Everyone shining, rich,
magnificent and great-hearted; at her is Pity, at her is Pi-
ety, at her Grandeur, in her unites itself all Good in
the Creation. Demosthenes with Cicero and Quintilian may
against her Mouth stand back, the Source, which a so wide
Stream of Speech spreads, Nectar the Good and severe Knife the
Guilty. She observes all Religion Prescriptions at most
and is not only the Restorer of her Temples, but industrious
Creatrix of such. She is always to the Day- and Night-
Divineservice completely devoted, with not less Adoration as the
Order-clergy with the holiest Prelates them dedicate, as it
Your most worthy devout, to the divine Cultus assigned
and with the worthiest Singers equipped Chapel with Your
other special Devotions openly make. She opens
everyone, especially the pious Petitioner without Delay her
compassionate Ears, and her Goodness helps not only that one, who
her addresses, but hurries frequently voluntarily to the Inquiry a-
round. These Things because of has not with Wrong, he, who
never something New sees, especially to our Times, before the
Others in the whole Universe You to the Part-taker of his Grace
made. Therefore has You with not less Decency as
Octavian in Rome, his Temple of the general Peace
build let, Your holiest of the Graces to the Memory to so
many in Your famous City Milan erected, and becomes not
full, him from Day to Day on all Art to adorn and
him in every of his occasional Needs to support.
And this short Discourse beg I the Reader not the
Flattery to ascribe, to which I as well from Nature as through
my Office throughout stranger am. For if you otherwise did, so
would you not less of the Envy and Disfavor against
his Highness, as I of the Flattery convicted be, whilst
you Your so many excellent and heavenly Gifts
not admired. "But what we with Eyes seen, witness
we." And I (stand) therein not alone, but at the same time with
my whole holiest seraphic Order, with his exce-
llent and distinguished Head and Shepherd, our reve-
rend Father M. Francesco Sansone of Brescia, his
worthiest General, at our this-year in Your famous
City Milan celebrated Generalchapter, whereby a very large Num-
ber most famous and celebrated Doctors and Bachelors of the ho-
ly Theology and other Sciences from the whole Uni-
versum and from every Nation, which under the Heaven is, pre-
sent was. In the same became diligently all cathedral as pub-
lic Disputations held, always in Presence of Your
ducal Highness infinite Goodness and devout Condescension
against her Servants at the same time with the most reverend Holiness, Mon-
signore Hipolyto's Your Relative, of the Title S. Luciae in Salice,
Deacon, Cardinal of Este, and much other Retinue of Your high
Magistrate. I overgo the Fullness and the overflowing Wa-
ste, which in all Things from the Hands Your
ducal Highness to the Support of a such Amount flowed
out, which not only for the then Present, but still
for the Belated several Months through sufficient was,
for Whose Well and happy Stand the whole lower Crowd
to the Highest her to the Prayer folded Hands stretches out,
and especially I unworthy, miserable Sinner, who himself Your
Highness from New recommends.

*) seil. Highness.
