Cap. LXXI.

Over that which under these in the Mathematics customary Expressions is understood, namely Hypothesis, Hypothumisse, Carausto, Pyramid-Cone, Pentagon-Chord, Perpendicular, Cathetus, Diameter, Parallelogram, Diagonal, Center, Arrow.

It gives some Expressions, Exalted Duke, which from the
Scholars in the mathematical Disciplines regarding their
Parts introduced been, so that man at none himself ambi-
guous to express have, which him, who therewith not
quite experienced, bore become, and which above in our
Compendium frequent inserted are, as You at the Reading
found have become. And in order not from the Ancients off-to-
deviate, have we them observed. Of them seems it me
not useless, here shortly the Reader Knowledge to give. And
indeed first of "Hypothesis",

Under Hypothesis must man the under the Parties Autho
and Opponent admitted and admitted Presupposition un-
derstand, by means of which man to conclude intends, and in the
Negation-case follows the Conclusion not therefrom; and there-
fore uses man she not to set up, if she not possible is.

Under the Hypothumisse, at all straight-lined Figures
especially, understands man the Line, which the largst Angle
at them opposite-stands. But especially is man used,
thereunder the the right Angle in the right-angled or
orthogonial Triangles, as they them in the Art-language
name, to understand, which necessary always the Half of the qua-
dratic Figure or of the elongated Tetragon, i.e. of the right-
angled more long than wide Figure of four Sides are.

Under Carausto understands man a straight Line, which the
End-points two to above directed connects. And it
can of the Carausten, the Number of the themselves elevating Line after,
more or less be.

Cone of the Pyramid (Tip), wants say the highest Summ-
it-point, where the Lines, which from their Basis go out, together-
run.

Under pentagonic or pentagonal Chord or we
want say, Chord of the whole Pentagon-angle understands man
a in the pentagonic Figure from any one its Corners
to the other, her opposite-set drawn straight Line, such
as it often happened.

The Perpendicular wants say a straight elevated, or on
an other plumb, i.e. so placed Line, that she one or
more right Angles around herself around forms. And likewise also,
if she on the said Art on a plane Surface stood.
And usually uses man she at the Triangles to their Mea-
surement to seek, as we in our named Work at
its Place said have.

Cathetus means the same as Perpendicular and from the
common People becomes she roughly at the Triangles in-
common Arrow of the Triangle called, and that comes from the Gre-
ek Word here.

Under Diameter understands man actually a straight
Line in the Circle, which through his Center goes, and with her
End-points the Periphery at every End meets, and the
Circle into two equal Parts divides. But man uses also still
at the Squares Diameter to say. And therefore says
man, in order not double-mining to speak, Diameter of the Circle
and Diameter of the Square to the Distinction of both. Under
Parallelogram understands man a Surface from parallel
Sides, which (Surfaces) actually four-sided are, namely from
those four Kinds, which you above in the Cap. 59 as Square, elon-
gated Tetragon, Rhombus and Rhomboid, with other
Name Elmuaym and the Elmuaym similar designated had.
And although every Figure 1) of even Side-number equal-far off-
standing Opposite-sides has, as the Hexagon, Octagon, Decagon,
Dodecagon and other similar, so has man nonetheless
those four especially to understand.

Under Diagonal understands man mainly a from one
Corner to the opposite-lying in the elongated Tetragon drawn
Straight, which it into two equal Parts after Art of the Square
divides. And also at the Rhombus and Rhomboid uses man she
so to name.

Center becomes actually that Midpoint in the Circle
called, from which out, if man therein the Circle-tip unmo-
vingly fast-holds, the other around-turns, the Circle by means of the,
Circumference or Periphery called Line described becomes. And
all from those Points to the named Circumference led
Lines are among themselves equal. But man uses also at other,
straight-lined Figures the Midpoint of their Surface Center to
name, as at the Triangles, Squares, Five-, Six-corners
and others equilateral and also equiangular, since all from
every their Corners to the said Point drawn straight Lines
equal-measure among themselves equal be will.

Arrow becomes the straight Line called, which herself from the Mid-
point of the Arc any a Circle-part moves and perpen-
dicular on the Middle of his Chord stands. And man says Arrow with
Reference to the Part of the Circumference, which himself Arc calls, after
the Similarity of the material Bow, which als the named
three Expressions uses: namely Chord, Bow and Arrow.

And although very many other Expressions used
become, whereof we completely in our great Work tre-
ated have, so concern I me not, them here to cite,
rather it seemed me only necessary, these to the Understand-
ing of the present Compendium Your Highness to present, wherein, if
also at a such Number Leaves not concluded, yet
of not smaller Content and highest Speculations tre-
ated become is. And in the Deed, Exalted Duke, I
say, without to lie, Your Highness, that the Speculation of the
Mathematician herself the Quality after not higher extend
can, thereof off-seen, that sometimes the Quantities larger
and smaller are. And with these resolved and ended our
Megarenser Philosopher his whole Volume of the Arithmetic,
Geometry, Proportions and Proportionality in 15 special
Books ordered, as it the Insightful clear is. And therefore
becomes Your aforementioned most valuable Library not little
Favor and Dignity grow, as we before in our Letter
said; so far this as the only and sole in his Kind from
me designed, and until now (with Exception Your Highness) the
whole Universe unknown is, and indeed here in Your fa-
mous great City Milan with not unmeaning Worries
and long Night-watches under the Shadow Your Highness and
Your me like a Son Undeserved-measure, special and single
Protector, the Illustrious San Galeazzo Sforza Seuerino of
Aragonien, who Nobody in the War-art after-stands, and highest
Lover our Disciplines, who nowadays before All the use-
fullest and sweet Fruit his eager Lection the-same tastes.

And it stand to the Conclusion of our Report the humble
Pardon and guilty High-esteem of the constant Servant
Your Highness, who himself infinitely in every Way recommends.

Again and once more live happy and after Wish.
Ended on the 14. December to Milan in our quiet Monastery
MCCCCXCVII under the Reign of the highest Pontifex
Alexander VI. in the seventh Year his Pontificate.

1) regular.
