PREFACE.

The efforts of modern times have, as is well known, long been directed towards getting to the bottom of the lost technical foundations which constantly recur, especially in the painterly composition of masterpieces from the Renaissance period, in order to thus in turn have a stimulating effect on the art of the present. To have come closer to the solution of this task through the careful publication of the written traditions of outstanding masters of that period is the great merit of the "Source Writings." In fact, it is precisely the technical treatises that have suffered the undeserved fate of either rotting away unused and partly forgotten in the libraries of Italy, or, if perhaps published in earlier centuries, standing so far from today's understanding that only a few concern themselves with their study. This applies in particular to the Pacioli treatises of the "Divina Proportione" and the "Libellus de quinque corporibus regularibus." Insignificant as scientific works, their main value consists rather in the fact that, having arisen in the closest connection with the needs of artistic practice, they throw significant light on the manner of application of mathematical disciplines in the visual arts, especially at the time of the first upswing of the Early Renaissance. The aforementioned inconveniences: the cumbersome antiquated mode of expression, plus the abbreviations often hardly to be deciphered, which characterize the still existing edition of these two works dating from the beginning of the 16th century, explains why the same have hitherto remained as good as lost among practicing artists, quite apart from the fact that the study of the treatises, found in only a few copies in individual libraries, was difficult to enable.

To eliminate this deficiency at least in part through the present new edition, to deliver through the same a new contribution to the understanding of the artistic creation of a great time, and to be allowed to dedicate the tribute of his gratitude to the manes of the highly revered Councillor von Eitelberger, who alongside his friend Ludwig in Rome gave the first impetus for it, redounds to the special satisfaction of the editor of this [work].

Karlsruhe i./B. March 1889.

D. H.


---

CONTENTS.

Page

1. Introduction .................................................... 1 — 15

2. Text of the treatise of the "divina proportione" ................ 16 — 122

3. Likewise de architectura ........................................ 123 — 163

4. Translation of the "divina proportione" ......................... 164 — 286

5. Likewise de architectura ........................................ 287 — 337

6. Factual Notes on the Treatise of the "divina proportione" ....... 338 — 352

7. Plates .......................................................... 353 — 367


---

INTRODUCTION.

Among the few writings from the Early Renaissance which deal with technical-mathematical disciplines, insofar as they stand in relation to artistic practice, none should deserve the interest of the historian as well as the specialist so much as the in their time much-cited treatises of Pacioli. For does not even the greatest and most significant work from that time, Lionardo da Vinci's Book of Painting, contain essentially nothing but shortly strung-together notes without internal coherence, extending over all possible auxiliary sciences of painting, from which the scientific significance of the great master in no way sufficiently emerges. It is somewhat different with the writings of Pacioli, which in contrast to that, despite all other defects, nevertheless form a finished worked-through whole, of all the greater interest as they, as is known, arose in the first connection with the artistic needs of that time; one of the five regular bodies even derives its authorship not from Pacioli, but from Piero della Francesca, thus a real artist. Only upon reading these writings does one gain a full insight into the great difficulties which presented themselves to artists at that time even with simpler problems of geometry, and one cannot enough admire the insight and energy with which the most outstanding among them incessantly strived, with the defective scientific means as they had come down from antiquity, to settle the questions necessary for their purposes.

Fra Luca Pacioli, belonging to the Franciscan order, was according to Libri 1) born in the year 1460 at Borgo San Sepolcro, the same spot situated in the Tuscan Apennines where also the aforementioned Piero della Francesca saw the light of the world, whose scientific relations to the former will have to be discussed more exactly at another place. Of Pacioli's life circumstances little is known; only after his death is he cited more often by the authors of that time. According to Montucla 2) he had made journeys to the Orient on the order of his superiors, where he perhaps became more intimately familiar with Arab science. The results of his studies are found laid down in his main work the: "Summa di arithmetica". The work should be of practical interest also because, besides the algebraic [section], a section dealing with geometry is found therein, where in particular proportions are discussed, among which specifically the continuous ones are awarded greater usefulness and a series of theorems relating thereto is derived, which in fact seem to have proceeded less from theoretical speculation than from practical need. Since the golden section appears therein as a special case, this seems to point to a certain connection with the "Divina proportione" to be discussed further below.

Pacioli stood namely, as is reported, 3) in scientific intercourse with the most outstanding artists of his time. Of Piero della Francesca, his older compatriot, it is said in particular that the latter instructed him in the mathematical disciplines, and even the celebrated Lionardo da Vinci did not disdain to design the figures for the Divina proportione. They are the same drawings of the five regular bodies and bodies derived from these by cutting off the corners or pyramidal elevation of the surfaces, which repeat themselves in later authors of treatises on perspective. In many places Pacioli writes besides of his friendly relations to both masters. Piero in particular he designates in the introduction of the first named main work dedicated to Duke Guidubaldo of Urbino as "il monarca alli tempi nostri della pictura" [the monarch of painting in our times], while in the treatise on the golden section the friendly relations to Lionardo are emphasized multiple times and his Cenacolo, as well as the equestrian statue of the Duke of Milan, unfortunately completed only in model, are named among the masterpieces of that time. In the same treatise are found moreover multiple names of practicing artists who sought instruction from the author on practical questions; in particular, reference is made with satisfaction to the applause which his scientific lectures held at Florence, Milan and other places found among high and low, which Dukes and Princes were wont to glorify by their presence. From this lively intercourse of theory and practice, of science and art, proceeded essentially indeed those two treatises, which are not so much to be regarded as results of theoretical research, as rather owing their origin predominantly to practical purposes of the practicing artist. Of them the first, the De divina proportione presented here, originated towards the end of the fifteenth century and was published for the first time at the beginning of the sixteenth. The same is dedicated to Duke Lodovico Sforza, called il Moro, and forms properly only the general or theoretical Part as introduction to a second treatise on the five regular bodies and bodies derived therefrom, which occupies itself with the solution of specific geometrical problems of artistic practice expressed in numbers. The short treatise on architecture added to the first named almost only as an appendix stands factually quite out of connection with that one, unless one assumes such a one as Libri l.c. believes to recognize therein. The same says namely, in speaking of the Divina proportione, Pacioli wanted to demonstrate therein how that proportion, which one also names the golden section, is found in the articulations of all well-formed human figures just as in the creations of art, of architecture especially, and must recur everywhere where something beautiful is to arise, so that even the letters of the alphabet are to be constructed corresponding to this rule. Now however what Pacioli says in that treatise on architecture about the human figure is in the most essential points nothing but a repetition of the Vitruvian statements, and the same can also be asserted regarding the orders of columns, all the more so since the author himself makes no secret of it. With Vitruvius however, and likewise with all architects of the Renaissance who, like Serlio, drew from him, not the golden section, but rather the harmonic numerical ratio derived on the basis of musical chords plays the main role. Finally as concerns the alphabet, the same is added together with the constructive determinations given by the author at the end of the treatise, whereupon everyone can convince himself to what extent Libri's view appears motivated in this respect. Were it nevertheless well-founded, one would have to ask all the more with what right a work of younger date 1) was allowed to pass off as completely new something which was already known three hundred years ago. Nevertheless it stands firm and emerges from the remarks occasionally scattered in the treatise itself, that Pacioli, even if he does not conceive the golden section as the basis of a universally valid principle of nature and art, yet overestimates its significance by far. He goes indeed so far in his enthusiasm as to confess that through these his discoveries science has arrived at the limits of what is possible to human ability and future progress is to be hoped for only through extension of the previous, but not through invention of new theories. Naive utterances of this kind might occasion the results, new for that time, whereby not only the five regular [bodies], but in general all possible modifications obtained therefrom by cutting off the corners and so forth show themselves subject to the golden section directly or indirectly regarding their form ratios. Indeed an occasional utterance even points to in what sense the author wants that future-to-be-hoped-for extension of science understood, for he conceives his theory of the transition from the simpler to the more complicated, that is to bodies bounded by a greater and greater number of surfaces, which result from those by corner-cutting, as it were as a substitute means for the differential calculus, in order to arrive in this way at all possible bodies bounded by curved surfaces, as he expressly indicates at the relevant place by the expression "in ogibilibus". *) Besides, for him those bodies have also a practical and aesthetic significance: Apart from the hymn of praise to the five regular bodies with which he begins the relevant treatise, he misses no opportunity to recommend the practical application of the same to architects and sculptors, because the regularity of their form affords aesthetic pleasure to the beholder, so that even Phidias, the greatest master of antiquity, did not fail to apply the same.

With the great significance which Pacioli's Divina proportione claimed in its time as a guide for artists and technicians, beside the historical interest the question of the theoretical and practical value of the treatise, especially of the golden section, from the standpoint of today's art science lies near, all the more as already antiquity attributed a special importance to this ratio, as the name seems to indicate, just as to Euclid essentially everything was already known which Pacioli brings forth about the Divina proportione: for all theorems contained therein can be derived as necessary consequences from the definition itself. Thus it explains itself that with the reawakening of the study of antiquity the interest for Pacioli's writings, which offered essentially nothing new, and therewith also that for the golden section gradually receded. Only long afterwards, in the middle of this century, was the subject taken up anew in the mentioned writing and in a more general conception the golden section conceived not only as a morphological principle of natural formations, but also as an aesthetic basic principle of all artistic creation, thus the same significance which according to Libri was already attributed by Pacioli to the Divina proportione, placed anew in the foreground. It was a matter first of constructing a so-called canon of the human figure on the basis of this principle. The endeavor to produce a normal figure for the purposes of art has in itself nothing strange. Already in old times, among the Egyptians as among the Greeks, such models may have existed. The usual and most natural procedure consists in determining from a number of measurements on individuals formed as normally as possible, but otherwise different according to age and sex, the linear ratios of the individual body parts with respect to the total length of the body, and deriving therefrom according to the principle of probability calculation the mean value. From this results the so-called canon, which is thus to be regarded in a certain measure as a general type without individual peculiarities. However, the artist represents not types, but always individuals, be they ever so ideal, like the antique figures of gods, which are wrongly designated as types, for there dwells in them all always a certain individual character. To represent this, the artist would have to know in every case the corresponding modifications of his canon, which modification [is] all the greater, the fewer individuals of corresponding kind are taken into consideration in the production of the canon. It is indeed a question whether instead of a canon derived in a previous general way it would not be more advisable for the purposes of the artist to derive special canonical forms not only for every age and sex, but also for every individual character type from a number of corresponding normally formed individuals, just as indeed also Hellenic plastic art exhibits not one, but different types as such. Nevertheless, it may lie in the interest of art to seek out a general fixed law according to which the most normal body forms can be geometrically constructed. To this purpose, as is known, the golden section was also used. In fact, the measurements of Zeising and the constructions of normal human figures undertaken thereafter (cfr. among others Brocheneck, the male and female Normal figure) have shown that the ratios of the golden section adhere to the real natural forms just as well as also to the best formations of antique art with relatively insignificant deviations, such that under fundamental application of this law in turn a kind of "canon" results, which deviates hardly essentially from that obtained in the other way. But Harless remarks rightly that also any arbitrary other continuous proportion must lead to the same results through continued linear division, which is why a morphological principle according to which all organisms occupy themselves in the sense of the golden section is to be disregarded. On the contrary, every other method adopted, insofar as it is only accompanied by results which do violence neither to the natural forms nor to the mean values derived therefrom by direct measurements, will have the same success, without the one being due preference over the other, whether we with Carus seek the natural articulation of the form from the vertebral column or like Schmidt lay a basically quite arbitrary geometric construction as a foundation or like Quetelet and after him Trost proceed purely empirically.

The only rational and only thinkable way to create a canon of the human figure in the true sense of the word would evidently be that based on the organic laws of formation which accompany the development of man since his first origin in the embryo. But to fathom these we are still far distant and will, as the author cited above remarks, probably remain so forever. However useful otherwise the golden section in its application to the external formation of the human body has proved itself for artistic study, it remains yet only one of the infinitely many means which yield the same result, thus something quite external.

But it behaves differently with the aesthetic effect which forms articulated according to this principle produce in the beholder. If the eye upon contemplation of an object is to receive the sensation of lawful articulation of its parts, it is in the first line required that the law in question be as simple as possible, in order to announce itself as such at the first glance. The simplest ratio however would be that of the equality of all parts, which however for obvious reasons can remain out of account here as an aesthetic principle. The next simplest ratios like 1 : 1/2 : 1/3 : 1/4 the eye can indeed still distinguish by comparison of two adjacent stretches, but already the harmonic ratio 1 : 1/2 : 1/3 : 1/4 would be difficult to recognize without other aids, and still more difficult, almost impossible would be the estimation of their ratios with more complicated numbers, e.g. such as grow in certain intervals, unless the unit or the module of the division recurs in all parts of the structure, as perhaps with the ashlars or bricks of a more complicated building. But regarding the aesthetic impression it is also less a matter of the numerical value of the ratios, than of bringing to consciousness the lawful execution of such in the whole as in all its parts or in other words the articulation of the same according to a certain rhythm. Now of proportions in the most general sense, as is known, two kinds: arithmetic and geometric are to be distinguished. Of the former the successive members of a series are derived by addition or subtraction, of the latter by multiplication or division from the initial members. The simplest form for series of the first Kind would thus be that where only two initial members a and b are to be assumed arbitrarily, from which the following can be derived by the relations c = a + b, d = b + c, e = c + d and so forth. At the base of every such series lies, as already highlighted elsewhere 1), a certain organic principle, which says that from two weaker ones a stronger one, or conversely from this two weaker ones proceed, as perhaps in tree growth. 2) It is obvious that the eye through the comparison of each three successive members in every series so formed, by flying over the same, will immediately recognize its law of formation. On the other hand, it would not readily overlook the equality of two geometric ratios a/b and c/d which is supposed to exist between four pieces a, b, c, d adjoining each other on the same line. The glance would, first gliding from a to b, compare these lengths, then passing over from b to c attempt the same, without finding for it a hold from the ratio of the two first pieces, and thus feel a gap in the observation. Only when this is filled by the determination that the ratio of b/a shall be equal to the neighbor-ratio c/b, as in continuous proportions, is a continuous comparison and thus a recognition of the rhythm possible. If further to this simplest geometric proportion always recognizable to the eye is added the condition that between the three magnitudes a b c also the arithmetic ratio a + b = c shall take place, there results thereby that which is satisfyingly designated as golden section, whose occurrence in organic nature should according to this have nothing striking, while at the same time the double relationship which takes place among each three of its members becomes clear to the eye immediately and without further aids. All other proportions coming to application in art, in particular harmonic division, require, to clarify them to the beholder, such helps as the perpendiculars to the image plane divided into perspectively equal sections converging in the eye-point, which first by means of the perspective square net arising through them and the lines parallel to the image plane make the law of their division perfectly understandable to the eye. The difficulty is here already therefore greater, because two members of the proportion remain independent of one another, from which always result for the eye the inconveniences indicated above. The application of the golden section as construction principle for the outer form of the human body will, according to the previous explanations, indeed never be able to replace the law of nature unknown to us. It will much rather always be and remain a surrogate, like all remaining attempts of this kind to construct a canon. But among all the principles which in this sense have been applied up to now to the human body, and furthermore also promise application regarding other organisms for which the previously explained conditions hold true, to none might the preference of aesthetic perfection be due with more right than to this one, insofar as the execution of this law and the rhythm thereby produced in the whole and the parts reveals itself to the unbiased gaze more easily than others. That it is possible for art at all to bring such a rhythm to expression in the human figure, no one will deny who in this respect has deemed the forms of antiquity worthy of a closer consideration. Despite all advantages it is yet not to be denied that enough cases can occur where nothing less than the golden section would be in place. To want to construct musical chords according to the scale of the golden section would be just as absurd as the division of the human body according to the principle of the harmony of tones. Only there where from the thing itself this or that ratio results naturally of itself, will its choice have the preference before others. Whether moreover these indicated relationships were known to Pacioli himself remains doubtful. The Divina proportione contains thereof, except the previous indications, nothing of significance.

According to content the treatise falls into four groups. The first gives a number of elementary theorems on the golden section, which however are arbitrarily strung together without internal necessity, whereby regarding the proofs reference is made to the relevant passages of Euclid, so that for the sake of understanding it seemed necessary to explain most of these theorems briefly, as has happened in the Appendix at the end of the treatise. Moreover, by far not all would have been necessary for the following. To them attaches a second group, which occupies itself with the geometric construction of the five regular bodies, which, since it rests on a purely elementary foundation without knowledge of the newer geometry and the theory of polar structures, naturally turns out somewhat circumstantial. After this group concludes with the proof that in contrast to the infinite number of regular polygons only five corresponding body forms exist, in the following a series of mutual inscriptions or circumscriptions of said bodies are discussed, such that either corners fall on corners or surfaces on surfaces or corners on surfaces or surfaces on edges, wherein Pacioli commits the error already reprehended by Tartaglia 1) of passing over a number of cases with silence, indeed in one case: the inscription of the Octahedron in the Icosahedron, under adduction of mysterious reasons attempts the proof that this case is impossible. It seemed therefore necessary in the interest of the matter to settle the totality of all possible cases of mutual inscriptions briefly in the Appendix on the basis of the theory of pole and polar. To that oddly sounding assumption, moreover, a tradition stemming from antiquity seems to have occasioned Pacioli, and shows erroneously evident how firmly the power of prejudices was rooted even among the scholars of that time. The Platonic doctrine of the four elements, to which as fifth he adds the force of heaven, the author believes namely to have to apply to the five bodies, by distributing them corresponding to the degree of perfection of the simple substances which they symbolically represent. This degree of perfection however he determines according to the number of those which can be inscribed in each of the same, whereby the Dodecahedron as the most perfect takes up all four in itself, but the Icosahedron as the next perfect permits only three inscriptions. Moreover, one sees already from the circumstantiality of the treatment of this subject that the author feels himself here less independent than elsewhere. As conclusion of this part the content treats a number of forms designated as "dependent" on the five regular bodies, but restricts itself thereby to mere description. All can be derived, with exception of the 72-faced body, from those by cutting off the corners or pyramidal elevation of the particular surfaces.

The last group begins after a longer intermezzo with the deduction of the determinations of volume of prisms, cylinders, whole and truncated pyramids and cones without proof; only once is the attempt made to prove why the pyramid must yield exactly the third part of the volume of the prism of equal base and height.

Herewith the mathematical content of the treatise is essentially exhausted. As appendix follows, as remarked, in twenty chapters a short summary on architecture. It contains, besides an extensive introduction factually devoid of interest, the main statements and practical rules taken from Vitruvius, insofar as they relate to column construction and column building. Prefixed is a short compilation of human body ratios, likewise borrowed from Vitruvius, which according to that author served the oldest column articulations as model.

Regarding the methods, insofar as they come into consideration scientifically as such, the defects adhering to them have already been highlighted in general. Apart from the theorems of the golden section sent in advance without proof, in the treatment of the five regular bodies and the deduction of their mutual relations, besides the Pythagorean theorem, the chord and tangent theorems of the circle as they are found in Euclid, hardly other theories come into consideration. By means of such theorems the heights of the sections parallel to the ground plane are determined, which one lays through the bodies at corresponding places, and likewise the relative coordinates or mutual distances of the corner points of these sections. That so elementary a procedure leads to the goal only in the most circumstantial ways is obvious. With the Dodecahedron e.g. the assistance of the Cube inscribed in it would have already simplified the construction; likewise that of the Icosahedron, if one does not want to derive it as polar figure of the Dodecahedron, would shape itself far more comfortably with assistance of the circumscribed Cube, whose sides each contain an edge of the Icosahedron. That Pacioli does not prefer this procedure to the more complicated one explains itself by the fact that it would have contradicted his principle to proceed from the simpler to the more complicated, to discuss the mutual relations of the five bodies without having previously investigated the formation of the individual ones exactly for themselves. He saves therefore the investigation of these relations for the third group. The inadequacies of this part have already been highlighted. It offers moreover nothing which meets us not already in Euclid. The fifteenth Book of the same contains the same twelve problems of mutual inscription of regular bodies which Pacioli takes up here again. The remaining still possible cases escape him: indeed he even disputes them for reasons mentioned above. In this too he was moreover not the first, but already his predecessor Campanus had represented the same view. But already Tartaglia proved, as remarked, the untenability of this view and added two new cases, the inscription of the Icosahedron in the Cube and the case denied by Pacioli. The latter's proof methods are moreover by far clearer and shorter than the clumsy methods of Pacioli. But only the newer geometry was able to demonstrate in elegant deduction the full number of all possible cases, by deriving from each of the cases known until then the polar figure and thereby doubling the number. Also the last group shows nothing less than own work of the author, much rather the notes regarding the bodies not to be counted in the group of the regular ones seem to have only the purpose of bringing shortly to memory the general rules for the problems relating to these contained in the following treatise, the Libellus.

To today's concise and precise manner of expression the diffuse, awkward sentence formation, as we encounter it in both treatises, has something unpalatable. Already the contemporaries designate his way of writing in a little flattering manner as: "Ceneraccio" (lye of ashes, dirt broth). In fact it is not merely the half-latinized word formation forming a contrast to today's sonorous Italian ears, also regarding the train of thought there is by no means found everywhere held fast that strict logic which we know to prize as a merit of the classical time. Mathematical theorems are found according to the custom of that time in colorful mixture with dogmatic absurdities and bigoted superstition. Not infrequently whole episodes are interpolated which without any relation to the matter interrupt the train of ideas without need. Yet one may not judge unjustly. For well might the monk, experienced through his oral lectures, with regard to the public to whom he deduced his doctrines, among whom, as mentioned, by no means exclusively artists and technicians, but also Princes, high lords were to be counted, for whom it was less a matter of the seriousness of science than of light entertainment, have seen the necessity of interrupting the tiring monotony of dry prose now and then by such episodes. In the Divina proportione this seemed all the more necessary, as the treatise, dedicated to the Duke of Milan, presents itself in fact also formally as an oral lecture directed to his person.

More historical interest, insofar as the name of Lionardo da Vinci is knit to it, might comprise the plates added to the treatise, which contains a greater number of drawings of regular and bodies derived therefrom partly in skeletal form, partly as solid bodies, in such a way as they have since then passed over into most works of perspective content. Evidently one saw therein an essential means, first to acquire a certain practice through such drawings, also with less sharply articulated contours of natural organisms to be able to tax correctly the relative position of the individual surface parts bounding them and to represent them perspectively accordingly, in a similar way as the artist begins his studies first with drawing from plaster figures before he turns to natural models. For the present purpose they might therefore be all the more dispensable, as, as remarked, by no means anything peculiar offers itself therein, insofar as they are found again in almost all perspective treatises of that time, quite apart from the fact that the production of the not small number of plates would have occasioned a not insignificant increase in costs.

The new edition of the Divina proportione set itself properly first the purpose of making the antique text of the earlier edition, become almost unpalatable through abbreviations of all kinds, readable again and at the same time to correct the factual defects and inaccuracies, in order thereby to facilitate the overview and judgment of the scientific aids which the art of that time disposed of, at the same time however beside this historical interest it would like also to act stimulatingly on today's artist, to whom knowledge and drawings of the regular and bodies derived therefrom in the manner as Lionardo did it might also today still be well to be recommended, provided that instead of the spirit-killing manner of Pacioli the aids of the newer geometry are used, as shortly indicated in the Appendix of this edition. Without this knowledge art would not only make all such studies more difficult for itself, but also close a field of richest stimulation for its purposes, which circumstance falls all the more into the balance as the modern generation of practicing artists does not share the advantage of the old masters, who were wont by no means to restrict themselves merely to art, but, as known, to function at the same time as technicians, engineers, architects.

Finally be it remarked that the copy of the edition from the beginning of the 16th century laid at the basis of the editing belongs to the library of the k. k. Austrian Museum, by which it was most kindly placed at disposal by the deceased Director Councillor v. Eitelberger. Besides this, occasionally for doubtful passages the manuscript of the Vatican was consulted.
